Okay, this is long overdue and I really need to 'fess up. I tried post a different thread to you but I think what I was trying to say was in it's feeble stages. What I really want to convey is how grateful I am that ENFJs are in the world. ENFJs are absolutely wonderful people and I'm not sure you know your gifts to those around you. I think you have an "idea" but I think you like things "confirmed" by others. So here it is. Forewarning: I am very emotional and honest about this so expect this to be a long post.

I think I am more than qualified to boast about ENFJs' sensational qualities. After testing for type, all six of my very closest (physical real life) friends are ENFJs. These are males and females. Plus, the father of my child (marriage lasted 8 years) with whom I still remain friends is also an ENFJ. If it wasn't for the ENFJ, I honestly don't know how I would make it through my life.

Do you know how beautiful and how charming you are? Do you know that wherever I may go, a party or whatever, you manage to find me and approach me? You extend your hand to me in friendship and love. You take risks at being my friend and you are so loyal to me once you do. You see the good in me when I don't see it in myself.

You have such strength. You go through your life and see the good in others. Yes, sometimes you get hurt and don't understand why there wasn't "that connection" because you felt it so deeply on your end. All I can say is that "I'm sorry". And you've wasted your time on many people that were not even worthy of you. That is usually when you call me and I will listen forever. I will listen to all the pain you are suffering or have suffered. I will help you see things "in a different way" so that you can feel good about yourself again. I have absolutely no problem doing this. That is finally my chance to love you back.

It's so sweet. You always want to make sure you're doing "the right thing", that you did it "nobly". You love to "report" to me how you handled different situations. I love hearing it. We encourage each other, right? I will always validate you that you did something right. This is not because I'm into blowing smoke up your ass. This is because the reality is : You care about others and "doing the right thing" WAY more than most people on this planet. You have a good heart. I help you to trust in that. I want you to trust in yourself and to be able to need validation only from yourself.

You know you're physically gorgeous, right? I mean I know you are HOPING that you are. It's scary to reveal your insecurities. But you can relax. The reality and truth is: You ARE gorgeous. It doesn't matter when you get too skinny, too fat, too young or too old. There is a beauty you posses that will always be. Trust me, I've seen it. My ENFJ friends ages range from 21 to 56, I've seen you all through many stages and you ALL remain gorgeous. Do you ever age? Lol.

It's okay to have this wonderful "physical gift". Who is it better bestowed upon than persons who equally match that with their insides as well. You know you confuse people, right? You are so attractive, so intelligent, you are so open, AND THEN what you give emotionally!!!!!!! Do you know how that blows people's minds??

There is no other personality that is better suited for me when it comes to friendship, contact, and communication. We both can call each other at any odd time of the day. We both don't get offended if one of us has to 'go' all of a sudden. We just "get" each other. We can go long stretches without speaking to each other. We both know what that's about. We are both extraverted and have our hands in "lots of pies." We both get "busy", but then when one of us calls the other and we finally make "contact", we can talk for hours and quickly go to an emotionally deep level as if we've never left each other's side
You ENFJs keep me "in line". No, it's not by you demanding it. I stay in "line" because I am inspired by your efficiency in this world. You have this fine balance of "taking care of business" and "loving those around you." In fact, you're AMAZING at this capability. You are wonderful, loving role-models. When I want to give up and do nothing, you show me how I can undertake EVERYTHING. When I want to turn around and throw a tantrum at the person who just hurt me, you show me how to convey the message more appropriately. Lol- THAT is your biggest gift to me. But I guess I tend to do the same for you. It's just easier giving the appropriate advice when you're not the one being hurt I guess. Why do we feel such a symbiosis with each other?

For some reason, you all ask my advice. Do you know how much of a self-esteem booster that is for me? People that I think have it together WAY more than I do, seem to crave my every word. And then when I give it, you love me for it. You're so sweet. I think you understand that I need to give too.

I know it's hard for you to ask for compliments. You are ALWAYS complimenting me. But it is so charming to see how I can turn your day around when I give you compliments. No, my compliments are not "fluff". You really deserve what I tell you. And you look and sound so wonderful receiving compliments. I don't know a better group of people to bestow compliments upon. You become so honest, so child-like. A big smile spreads across your face. You give hugs with a resounding "Thank you". You always manage to express thoughtful appreciation.

My ENFJ friends have all been "aunts" "uncle" and of course "father" to my daughter. Even though I've cut out extended family, my child has a full "family" because of you.

Thank you ENFJs. You have inspired me to no end. I owe much of what I am today to you because you believed in me when I had no idea there was even a seed of worthiness within. Thank you for always "being there" when I lock my keys in my car. Thank you for helping me with planning. THANK YOU FOR BELIEVING IN ME. Thank you for taking the time to explain.

You are wonderful people. You glow and your are a beacon. I rarely have negative incidences with you. Even when I have become frustrated with an ENFJ, it can't last that long. Because in just a short amount of time you manage to do something amazing again.

Seriously, other divorced people drop their jaw when they witness the caring and cordial relationship between me and my ex husband. But neither one of us is good at being "mean" anyway. So we laugh at the world in all their "meanness."

ENFJ, No one understands me like you do. And I ALWAYS feel accepted by you. Please love yourselves dearly ENFJs. Your kind of love saves people's lives. I mean it.
 
ENFJs are outstanding leaders of groups, both task groups and growth groups. They have the charming characteristic of seeming to take for granted that they will be followed, never doubting that people will want to do what they suggest. And, more often than not, people do, because this type has unusual charisma. ENFJs place a high value on cooperation from others and are most willing to cooperate themselves.

Found in only 5 percent of the general population, ENFJs place people as being of highest importance and priority. As a result, ENFJs may find themselves feeling responsible for the feelings of others to an extent which places a burden on the relationship. An ENFJ communicates caring, concern, and a willingness to become involved. Thus people turn to ENFJs for nurture and support, which an ENFJ is usually able to deliver. At times, however, these kinds of demands can overwhelm ENFJs, who find at this point that they lack the skills to dissociate. ENFJs do not seem able to turn away from these demands even when they become unreasonable. Or, if forced to let go of the burden through sheer unavailability of time or energy, ENFJ's experience a guilt all out of proportion to the realities of the commitment made to the relationship.

ENFJs are especially vulnerable to idealizing interpersonal relationships, raising these relationships to a plane which seldom can sustain the realities of human nature. Because of this tendency to raise interpersonal relations to the ideal, ENFJs may unwittingly overpower their friends, who believe that they cannot possible live up to an ENFJ's perception of them. The fact is, ENFJs are extraordinarily tolerant of others, seldom critical, and always trustworthy.

ENFJs take communication for granted and believe that they are understood and that their communications are accepted. Just as they themselves are accepting, so do they assume that others are the same. When ENFJs find that their position or beliefs were not comprehended or accepted, they are surprised, puzzled, and sometimes hurt. Fortunately, this does not happen with high frequency, as ENFJs have a remarkable fluency with language, especially in speech; they are particularly adept when communicating face-to-face as opposed to communicating in writing. They are influential, therefore, in groups, having no hesitation about speaking out, no matter how large or small the group may be.

ENFJs have an unusual ability to relate to others with empathy, taking into themselves the characteristics, emotions, and beliefs of others. This can pose a danger for ENFJs because they can unconsciously over-identify with others and pick up their burdens as if they were their own. In the process, ENFJs may risk their own sense of identity. They have a natural ability to mimic because of this highly developed ability to empathize by interjection. They are likely to be very concerned about the problems of those close to them, but they also may get as deeply involved in the problems of those not so close and may find themselves over-extended emotionally.

ENFJs would do well to follow their hunches, for their intuition tends to be well developed. Decisions made purely on the basis of logic may not be so sound, and checking with a person who has a strong T preference might be at times advisable for the ENFJ. In the framework of values, however, the ENFJ is on a certain ground. Generally, they know what they prefer and can read other people with outstanding accuracy. Seldom is an ENFJ wrong about the motivations or intent of another, hidden or not.

Career
This longing for the perfect carries over into the careers of ENFJs, who experience some degree of restlessness whatever their jobs. And, as with ENFP's, ENFJs have a wide range of occupations which offer success. Being verbally adept, ENFJs contribute to an unusual level when dealing with people, particularly face-to-face; the media, the ministry, and the stage and screen are populated with successful ENFJs. They make superior therapists, charismatic teachers, excellent executives, and personalized salespersons. Areas that would not permit utilization of the interactive talents of ENFJs for example, accounting, should be avoided; otherwise, almost any people-to-people occupation where personal, sustained contact is involved capitalizes on the personality of an ENFJ.

For Envisioner Mentors, life is a process of succeeding at relationships. There can never be enough truly empathic relationships to foster mutual growth. They enjoy the creative process in many forms and often bring a fresh view on projects they enthusiastically work on. Realizing dreams - their own and others - is what life is all about. To not have dreams to manifest and a chance to communicate and share values is to live a life with no meaning and purpose, a fate worse than death.

For them, all of life is about the interpersonal, and they constantly seek opportunities to grow together through relationships. There are times when they value logical explanations. Having realizations that foster development and help them understand why the world is the way it is helps them lead a purposeful life. Learning from relationships is important and occasionally painful.

Their thought processes tend to be integrative and global as they seek to find ways to help others know themselves and their life's mission. Heeding the call to a life work or mission is tremendously important to them, and they are readily available to others to help reveal to them their unique purpose. Sometimes they find themselves knowing what they do not want to know, yet to shut off their empathic knowing is to shut off a vital life force.

In the interpersonal realm, they often find that their ease in connecting with others becomes a hindrance to their own well-being as they get lost in the relationship and lose sight of their own indentity until they learn to set boundaries. They often use their intuitive intellect to reconcile the past and the future as they seek to understand the meaning and significance of life events.

With such a talent for seeing potential in others and focus on realizing that potential, they often find living in the present difficult. By the time an event happens, they have already lived it.

Relationships

For Envisioner Mentors, relationships are about connecting. Life is all about relating empathetically, and people need lots of attention and commitment. Nurturing relationships is what they live for. There must be a sense of connection, to feel known, understood, needed, reassured, and praised. They often find themselves acting informally as counselors, even if that is not their profession. And that fulfills their daily dose of connection. The downside is they can become overburdened with others problems. They invest a lot in all their relationships, work or personal, creating a standard others may not be able to return. If forgiveness, honesty, and consideration are not present, they work to bring them in. Without them, a relationship is not worthwhile. For anything to work with a person, the relationship has to work. When there is conflict, problems will have to be talked about and healed before going on. They tend to be open and sharing, and they expect others to self-disclose, especially in the interest of resolving issues. They have a way of getting others to feel at ease and open up.

In their close relationships, they put a lot of energy into nurturing the relationship. There is a constant search for the ideal relationship where there is both friendship and romance with someone they can share everything with, especially meaning and purpose. Sometimes they have a hard time seperating from their ideal and objectivity eludes them. The more abrupt style of others often leads to hurt feelings, which they nurse internally. Their style is to easily communicate affection and appreciation with just the right message. Too much time alone leaves them needy, yet they need time to reflect on their own meaning and purpose too.
You want to be appealing, giving, caring and heartfelt. More importantly, you want to be needed, considered important and appreciated for your efforts. You see yourself as approachable, nurturing and thoughtful. You would like others to see you as empathetic, supportive and altruistic. Your idealized image is that you are a loving and helpful person.

You have a warm, sociable and enthusiastic personality. You want to be liked and are always ready with an easy smile, helpful advice or a friendly compliment. Relationship orientated, you reach out to others and are often the first one to lend a hand. A good listener, you focus on the needs and concerns of others. You usually know what people need and feel, and enjoy taking on the kind of role where you can show your giving and generous nature. You have developed the gift of flattery to the level of an art form because you see how this skill can be a currency for creating intimate rapport.

Secretly, you can feel needy and vulnerable feeling that you must earn the right to be loved. Avoiding a deep sense of loneliness, you find ways to connect to and be of service to others. You have an innate sense of what to say or do to make people feel seen and admired. Like a fairy godmother or godfather, you like to do special things for people and surprise them with unexpected gifts. You take note of others’ desires and try to fulfill them. You take pride in your ability to comfort and support others.

You find it gratifying to be of service and are drawn to people that have power and influence. You enjoy being the power behind the throne and make yourself appealing by being indispensable. Always ready to be helpful, others often depend on you. You have innate people skills and value interpersonal relationships above all else. Your extraordinary insight about what people need and your ability to create mutual trust and affinity are rare gifts. You love to be instrumental in helping others achieve their full potential.

Need
You need approval, recognition and admiration. Most importantly, you want to be seen as a ‘special’ friend. You go out of your way to notice what is needed and feel motivated when others acknowledge your efforts and express their appreciation. Sometimes, you are so focused on others, that you don’t pay attention to your own unmet needs and feelings. You may feel that in order to have your needs met by others, you must meet their needs first.
