 The key to understanding and appreciating ENFPs of any age is to remember that they are ruled by their highly developed sense of what is possible. They have an insatiable curiosity and need to talk about their many original ideas – whether or not anything comes out of them. Above all else, they think of themselves as idea people, but they are also deeply sensitive and need their feelings and values to be honored and understood. These two insights are essential to nurturing the energetic and imaginative spirit of ENFPs.

The examples that follow are drawn from stories of real children. But since all people are unique, your ENFP may not demonstrate all of the characteristics described or may not demonstrate them with the same degree of intensity. But if your child really is an ENFP, most of what you read should sound strikingly familiar.

Preschool ENFPs​
Birth to Age 4

​
Perhaps the most outstanding characteristic common to all young ENFPs is their high exuberance and excitement about people and new experiences. Preschool ENFPs instantly notice anything novel or out of the ordinary and are eager to explore and play with new toys. Rarely hesitant or reserved, even with strangers, they are very energized by being with other people and become more wound up, the more people they interact with. ENFPs are usually very eager to see, touch, and experience the world. Alert and especially aware of people, they tend to smile early and easily. Generally, excitable, bouncy babies, they like to be out of the house and tend to become bored and cranky on the days they have to stay home.

    From the time David was born, he seemed to be in perpetual motion. He derived much energy from the people around him and, even as a tiny baby, craned his neck to see faces and was excited by the voices and the touch of other people.

Highly social, happy infants and toddlers, ENFPs are usually able to express themselves well even before they start to talk. While they tend to be loud and demanding babies, they are also delightful and exciting, with an easy laugh and boundless enthusiasm. Loving and warm, most ENFPs enjoy being passed around to people other than their parents. While they prefer to be upright and able to see their environment, they also like to be snuggled and are usually very affectionate.

    Two-year-old Melissa seemed to have no fear of people. She was more than willing to be held by her parents' friends or relatives she barely knew. She was a dramatic and expressive toddler who delighted adults with her outgoing charm and vitality. Melissa loved to sing and show off for groups and usually started dancing as soon as she heard music, whether it was at a wedding or in a restaurant. Friendly and outgoing, Melissa would boldly walk up to children at a playground whom she did not know and ask if they wanted to play.

Even very young ENFPs are nearly always described as creative and imaginative. While they express this innovative thinking in many different ways, it is a true hallmark of ENFPs. Most are big talkers, very curious, and full of questions about why things are as they are.

    Three year old Trevor loved to draw and offered elaborate and amusing captions for his many drawings and paintings. His preschool teachers and parents often found themselves in stitches over his delightful sense of humor, clown-like antics, and joke telling. Trevor demonstrated a real acumen for solving problems in creative and unusual ways. And since he was so enthusiastic, he was nearly always able to persuade other children to play games his way.
    Holly had a circus of stuffed animals that always figured large in her play. Each had a name and a distinct personality, and she invented complicated scenarios and relationships between them to embellish her play story lines. Holly sometimes played alone for brief periods of time but really preferred to have the company of one of her parents or a friend who would act out the part of one or more of the animals with her.

From the toddler years on, art is usually a favorite activity. Making collages, painting, and drawing are activities ENFPs often love. And like most of what they enjoy, ENFPs like to show off their art, explaining in great detail what they had in mind or what is depicted in each piece. Young ENFPs also enjoy music, dancing, and putting on spontaneous performances for family and friends. All of their play springs from their rich imaginations and their love for action and variety.

    Jake's choice of toys was always a bit unconventional. He never had any sustained interest in toy cars or trucks – unless he was building one out of some totally unrelated material, like his supper. He preferred to use toys in other ways and often turned blocks into dinosaurs, sticks into weapons or flags, and chairs, tables, and blankets into secret forts. He spent much of the time discussing what superhero he was and the special powers he had. He liked to improvise costumes and, for about three months while he was four, wore a cape his grandmother had made everywhere he went.

hen I say depressed, I mean it in the literal sense. Depression, it can strike anyone, and even if ENFP's seem happy go lucky 24/7, they've got a dark side too. More often than not it will not come out because of the ENFP nature to always look on the bright side, but given a bad enough situation and a smack into reality, these are the stages of what a depressed ENFP will go through. ​


Stage One: ENFP will start feeling a bit lonely and disconnected. They will think it's just a stage that will pass, and will try to ignore it.

Stage Two: The ENFP will start feeling even more lonely, this can usually be brought about by having a hard time with family or feeling like they are insecure in their relationships in general. Stage One increases, and the ENFP will start feeling anxious.

Stage Three: The ENFP's feeling of anxiousness will become overbearing, and they may feel extremely insecure when talking to other people. They lose the quick wit and charm they used to have. The smile will because more nervous and the laugh will become less natural. They will still be trying to convince themselves it;s just a stage that they are going through and that nothing is wrong.

Stage Four: ENFP will most likely hit shut down mode. They will not talk to other people about their feelings or what is going on unless asked specific, prying questions. They will have a really hard time talking to people and feeling like they can relate. They will start coming across as an introvert.

Stage Five: The ENFP will be extremely stressed, lonely, and emotional. May start bursting out randomly and be extremely moody. Will experience periods of highs and lows. The ENFP may start crying over something seemingly insignificant. They will do this because there is so much bottled feelings up inside and that may have been the last thing to set them off edge.

Stage Six: The ENFP will start lashing out at other people like above, but more extremely. Will most likely show complete and utter disregard for authority. They will also start hurting the people they care about, to make them back off and go away. All the while the ENFP, through the stages, will try to convince themselves that nothing is wrong and that they will get better, and thus the problem worsens.

Stage Seven: They will finally admit to themselves that there is a problem but try consciously to contradict it. They will try to force themselves to relax and be wonderful again. They will try to establish the facts- what the problems is, how it went wrong, and what to do.

Stage Eight: If it gets worse at this point, the ENFP will not be acting like themselves at all. They will not be thinking clearly, and will most likely suffer from being illogical, irrational, and as well may suffer from extremely headaches. They will give up on caring and will not pay attention to the world around them, instead focusing all of their energy into their inner world of what they feel and dwell on it. They will no longer have any motivation to care or do the things they love.

Stage Nine: Your ENFP will start enjoying dark humor ad freaking other people out for the hell of it, especially the people they care about. However, at this stage they will not do this too extremely to the people they care about because their is that small piece of the ENFP that wants to hold the relationship in tact. They will push you away and drag you back in, and become and emotional roller coaster for anyone and everyone around them. If you ask what is wrong, the ENFP will completely shoot you down unless it is in a structured environment and they think that you are somebody that they can trust. However at this point the ENFP will become extremely untrusting, so talking to them about anything is much like walking on fragile glass about to fall apart and break forever. The ENFP will hold grudges.

Stage Ten: Complete personality turnaround, the ENFP will have lost it, or will have appeared to. Complete emotional instability and recklessness. They will be completely and utterly impulsive to the point of stupidity. They will not care about their well being or anybody else's. At this pion, the ENFP will be so far in their heads it will be nearly impossible to get through to them unless you sink to his or her own level of insanity and instability. They will have given up on life altogether, and will most likely have forgotten what it was like to really feel alive and well again.​

Extravert, iNtuitive, Feeling, Perceiving - ENFPs represent approximately 5% of the population. ENFPs are enthusiastic, charming, ingenuous, imaginative, risk-taking, sensitive,people-oriented individuals with capabilities ranging across a broad spectrum. Most ENFPs have good people skills and place great importance on their interpersonal relationships. They almost always have a strong need to be liked. They excel at bringing out the best in others, and are typically well-liked for this reason. They have an exceptional ability to intuitively understand a person after a very short period of time, and use their intuition and flexibility to relate to others on their own level. For ENFPs, details of everyday life are seen as trivial drudgery. They place no importance on detailed, maintenance-type tasks and will frequently remain oblivious to these types of concerns. When they do have to perform these tasks, they do not enjoy themselves. They have the ability to be productive with little supervision, as long as they are excited about what they're doing.

ENFPs have an unusually broad range of skills and talents. They are good at most things which interest them. Project-oriented, they may go through several different careers during their lifetime. To onlookers, the ENFP may seem directionless and without purpose, but ENFPs are actually quite consistent, in that they have a strong sense of values which they live with throughout their lives. Everything that they do must be in line with their values. An ENFP needs to feel that they are living their lives as their true Self, walking in step with what they believe is right. They see meaning in everything, and are on a continuous quest to adapt their lives and values to achieve inner peace. They're constantly aware and somewhat fearful of losing touch with themselves. Since emotional excitement is usually an important part of the ENFP's life, and because they are focused on keeping "centered", the ENFP is usually an intense individual, with highly evolved values.

An ENFP's Career Choice Should Probably Include...

    A position where they are not confined by strict schedules or mundane tasks.
    A creative and fun environment where they can work with a variety of people each day.
    A place where they have a lot of flexibility, and where they can work with people and ideas.
    Plenty of opportunities to be challenged by new situations, where each day is different from the day before.
    The ability to talk about ideas, possibilities, and implications and then see their innovations become a reality.
    An easy going and relaxed atmosphere, without a lot of rules, regulations, or restrictions.
    The chance to make a difference and work on projects they believe in.

An ENFP's Strengths Are:
ENFPs are good at a lot of different things. An ENFP can generally achieve a good degree of success at anything which has interested him or her. ENFPs are warm, enthusiastic people, typically very bright and full of potential. They live in the world of possibilities, and can become very passionate and excited about things. Their enthusiasm lends them the ability to inspire and motivate others, more so than we see in other types. They can talk their way in, or out, of anything. They love life, seeing it as a special gift, and strive to make the most out of it.

"Marching to the beat of a different drummer" is a hallmark trait of ENFPs and they admire others who are of the same mind. This quality allows them to be a driving force and make things happen. This is both a strength and a weakness. Used productively, this trait allows them to be a unique type of worker who can take a minimum of instruction and use his/her natural talents to expand on ideas and concepts and produce a finished product that goes above and beyond what was expected. The downside is that this trait can also stop an ENFP from producing anything of value. If he/she feels the instructions and work assigned goes against his/her value system, an ENFP can "stonewall" production by being obstinate and confrontational in expressing concerns over the "right and wrong" aspects.

Okay. This is funny that you ask if you are platonic. I've never had a non-sexual relationship with an ENFP male IRL. And no, I'm not a whore. It was only 2 and they were both special people to me. I have found we tend to have instant attraction.

Oh wait. There was this ENfP old man that I met and asked me out on a date and I felt nothing and said "no". So there you go. But he was 22 years my senior.

ENFP men are fuzzy lumps of love. They have so much energy and they are high on life. I love their laughter and their insight.

You guys have a lot of class. It's true. You have a right to judge other's who treat their women like crap. You ruin women. But in a good way. If a woman has ever had the privilege of dating you, she can never go back into expecting anything less. You set a new standard on how women and people should be treated.

You are so open and tolerant of other types and preferences. Seriously, you can't stand close mindedness. You are down to earth and so real. You are so good to your friends. You lift them up and inspire. Even when I've been in my darkest spot and feel like shit, and ENFP man could tell me I was a worthy person and that I will continue to kick ass in my life. ENFP don't judge me for my mistakes. They just dust me off. They give me a soft place to land and then they tell me, "Go. Or I'll kick your ass myself! Knock em dead!"

When other's need support, they can "fall" into you. It feels like they haven't slept for years when they do. Do you realize the type of comfort you provide?

Even a shallow stranger, or a friends with benefit, will be treated with the utmost respect. You make the most out of everything. You want to affect people positively. You work so hard at knowing what a person will need. You hate doing things just "on the surface".

You worry about so and so treating so and so badly. It really affects your own heart. You have incredible empathy.

You hate hurting people, but you get fierce when someone has hurt someone you care about. You are incredibly loyal and fun to be around. You make a person feel welcomed. You also tend to have self deprecating humor. You are humble. Way too humble. And you often date beneath you and function lower than your abilities. This is because you are too humble. You could stand to have a bit more entitlement.

You are incredibly witty and clever. You are fair. You need love. You love being loved. But most importantly, you love to give love.

There is a strength in knowing what you believe in. Even if other's think it is wacky, you know why it's important to you. And you are like a lion protecting your values. You stand firm.

You fight for the underdog. You have a strong distaste for other men who use women. You treat people with respect and you can make anyone laugh when they are down.

You are big kids. You are dreamers. You examine people, and can truly see when someone is "bad". Most people are better for knowing you and grow from knowing you.

You have an inner dark side. There is an inner pain. You rarely share and will only show to those who are very special and trustworthy. You need to go inward at times. This is you being real with yourself. At that time, you are not concerned with others and what you project. You NEED to go inward at times and take care of yourself. This is to recuperate from giving SO much to others.

I could lay around with you and roll on the floor all day. We could watch cartoons, eat grilled cheese sandwiches, and blow on each other's bellies unexpectedly. And then we could all of a sudden get on our high horse and talk about how some stupid law passed and just denied a certain people their rights. Haters. We hate haters.

Haha. ENFP men are cute. So very cute. So squeezable. But there is a hard core.

You are so rare. I don't care about statistics. You guys are RARE and the world is lucky to have you.

I have never met a self-centered male ENFP IRL. 