 ENTJs are strong, opinionated, independent, and logical children who are driven by their intellectual curiosity and need to master everything they try. They are also creative and inventive and are the most stimulated and inspired by anything out of the ordinary and by all kinds of possibilities. The most important thing to remember about ENTJs at any age is their lifelong drive to acquire knowledge and then demonstrate their competency to the outside world. ENTJs are energetic, exciting, and challenging children to parent. They demand fairness in all things and need plenty of logical and accurate explanations and a wealth of learning experiences to keep them growing and thriving.

The examples that follow are drawn from stories of real children. But since all people are unique, your ENTJ may not demonstrate all of the characteristics described or may not demonstrate them with the same degree of intensity. But if your child really is an ENTJ, most of what you read should sound strikingly familiar.

Preschool ENTJs​
Birth to Age 4​

ENTJ babies are almost always active, busy, and very physical. They need to challenge themselves and their environment, even from the first few days of their lives. Often noisy, expressive infants, little ENTJs are eager to see and engage people around them. They tend to become bored quickly by the same stimulation or too familiar toys. They are much more intrigued with anything new or out of the ordinary, especially scientific or building toys or the raw materials they use to make props for their imaginative games.

    When Dillon was a few months old, he loved his parents to hold him up so he could look out the front window and watch the people walk by on the street and the traffic moving in front of his apartment building. If he was tired and cranky, his father could usually calm him by showing him something he had never seen before. Dillon never really played with usual baby toys like rattles until he was a few years old and his infant brother began playing with them. He was more interested in interacting with adults, playing with his parents' computer or the remote for the VCR or constructing spaceships out of cardboard boxes.

While not all ENTJs are early talkers, those who are seem to speak fluently and articulately from the start. Most ENTJs rarely use baby talk, and instead move right into more adult speech patterns. One common characteristic of young ENTJs, observable from their earliest years, is that they always seem so sure of themselves. Convinced they are right, they may become very demanding about being heard and insistent about getting others to see their point of view or agree with their positions. They may not know just how they know what they are sure they know, but they will argue very convincingly and with great authority in their voices. And most young ENTJs hold strong opinions that are not easily swayed by the reactions or conflicting beliefs of other.

    By age two, Hillary carried on in-depth conversations with adults – even strangers of people she had just met. She appeared totally confident, standing with her hands on her hips, insisting that people hear her out. She was never intimidated by older or bigger children or by adults, even those in positions of authority like the director of her preschool or the parish minister. At age three, she was perfectly comfortable asking a store clerk for assistance. Time and again her parents heard from other people that Hillary seemed older than her

 ENTJs put a lot of effort and enthusiasm into their relationships. Since their major quest in life is to constantly take in knowledge and turn that into something useful, the ENTJ will try to turn everything into a learning experience. Within the context of relationships, that means they will constantly seek knowledge and revise the rules and definitions of their relationships. They value their relationships highly, especially those relationships which present them with new challenges and stimulate their learning. Such exchanges promote genuine affection and satisfaction for the ENTJ. Relationships which do not offer any chances for growth or learning hold no interest to the ENTJ. As in other areas of life, the ENTJ likes to be in charge of their relationships. In conversation, they are very direct and confrontational, and can be highly critical and challenging towards others. People involved in close relationships with the ENTJ need to have a good amount of personal strength. For those who do, the ENTJ has a tremendous amount to offer. 


These items apply to ENTJ bosses of either sex, but I'm going to use he/his/him etc. in the writing, to prevent cluttering the thing up with tons of him/her, his/hers, he/she, etc. It should also work reasonably well with ESTJ bosses.

1) Do your job. Get stuff done, and done right.

2) Be at least reasonably well-organized, such that you can remember important dates, meeting times, the location of any equipment you are responsible for, etc.

3) ENTJs generally don't mind arguing, provided it doesn't negatively impact the end goal, and provided it is not over stupid stuff. (Hint - If you start to argue and he looks bored or irritated rather than enthusiastic or interested in what you have to say, he probably considers it to be stupid stuff.)

4) Be respectful and mind your own business re: his personal life. Unless he specifically tells you a particular fact about his personal life, keep your nose out of that particular personal topic. Also, try your best to refrain from offering inane, "But that's not what everyone else would want or do!" sorts of commentary upon his personal life. You're not there to give empty-headed critiques of the curtains he's hung in his kitchen at home, his sleeping habits, his love life, or otherwise judge him on matters which are irrelevant to the workplace and are none of your business in the first place. It's invasive, presumptuous, and frankly, it makes you look like a vacuous, bubble-headed idiot who ought to have your mouth taped shut for everyone's sake, including your own.

5) If you truly don't understand what he's telling you to do, ask him to explain. Don't blunder on through because you think he'll bite your head off for asking questions, and screw everything up as a result. This will piss him off fifty times more than a "stupid question" ever will.

6) Time is important. Don't waste time, and keep the waltzing in late, sneaking out early, etc. to a minimum.

7) If he wants to talk or otherwise shoot the bull, then shoot the bull.

8) Be attentive to little ways you could make his job easier.

9) If he asks you to do something, do it promptly and without whining about it.

10) If he asks you to do something that is beyond your capability, tell him so. Don't remain silent, then try to blunder on through anyway and end up hurting yourself or halfassing the job.

11) If a project is going to be late, inform him of this when the fact first comes to your attention. Do not wait until the day it is supposed to be finished, and then tell him. The former will be forgiven, provided it was due to circumstances beyond your control, and provided you are ordinarily diligent in your work. The latter will piss him off.

12) If you encounter a problem you cannot solve, inform him when the problem is still small. Do not wait until it's turned into some godalmighty hellstorm of error before you say anything. If he finds out you knew about it back when it was a minor issue but said nothing, he will be pissed off.

13) If someone is giving you trouble such that it is making executing the tasks he's assigned you unnecessarily difficult, inform him of this. Once he is finished with them, they will usually be quite helpful in the future.

14) Don't hinder other people who are trying to do tasks he's assigned them. They will not appreciate it, and neither will he.

15) Be ready to offer a brief oral status report on your assigned tasks at any time.

16) Don't go on and on about celebrity gossip, reality television, or other topics which Thinking types (particularly NTs) generally find dull and boring, unless he's already expressed an interest in same.

17) If he tells you something in confidence, honor that trust by keeping your mouth shut. If he's been burned by this in the past, he might even test you by initially telling you something which is harmless but that he's not told anyone else, and waiting to see if it shows up in the office rumor mill.

18) Unless your workplace is in fact the production set of Days of Our Lives (or a similar show), it is probably not in your job description to create drama. Don't.

19) Do what you said you were going to do. Save your repertoire of crappy excuses for worming your way out of your Aunt Beatrice's dinner party, lol. Don't use them on him.

20) Don't expect him to be a magic mind reader. If something's truly bothering you, catch him in private and tell him so. Don't call him out in front of God and everybody -- nobody likes that, and ENTJs are no exception.

21) If he's even vaguely healthy, he won't expect you to be a magic mind reader, either. He won't cloak his expectations in seemingly irrelevant commentary about the weather outside, or in double/triple entendres, etc. and then lash out at you in various passive-aggressive ways for not understanding what he meant. Instead of putting you through this hell, he will be clear, like a good boss should be. (What I'm trying to get at here is this -- think of him being direct as a good thing, not a bad thing. Imagine how horrible things would be if he wasn't.)

22) If he's incapable of/not comfortable with being super touchy-feely, don't try to force it. Attempting to force it will eventually get emotion out of him, sure, but unless the emotion you were hoping he'd display is frustration, you'll likely not get the emotion you were looking for.

23) If you're worried that he's somehow pissed at you or disappointed with you from how he's behaving, but can truly think of nothing you've done that would have pissed him off or disappointed him, then ask. Don't drive yourself bananas worrying over what could potentially be nothing. (Luckily for you it probably is nothing, though. Unlike some other types, ENTJs tend to be direct about it when they're pissed off or disappointed. If he was, he'd have probably already said something. Reference #21.)

24) When circumstances present you with a choice between taking responsibility for your behavior and trying to weasel out of it with double-talking jive, pick the former. He will view the latter with contempt, and rightly so.

25) (Especially for SLOEI ENTJs) If something negative just happened that had nothing to do with you and his mood took a sudden dive in response, don't assume that it has something to do with you. That is, don't start being defensive, or acting like you're spoiling for a fight, or just generally being a pain in his ass. I know it's hard for some people to believe, but everything is not all about you. (This is common sense, or should be. Then again, it's also common sense to know that if he's already irritated, pushing his buttons or otherwise acting like an idiot is an excellent way to shift part of his irritation from the original problem ONTO yourself, even if he wasn't originally irritated with you.)

26) However hard he might push you, it is a virtual certainty that he pushes himself even harder. If you find yourself tempted to badmouth him behind his back about what a slavedriver he is, remember all the times the dark circles under his eyes have persisted for weeks on end, all the times he was still working when you left in late afternoon and was already there and busy when you came into work the next morning, etc. I don't know if it's any consolation to you, but he really doesn't ask anything of you that he doesn't demand twice as much of from himself.

27) He has a wide sentimental streak in his nature, but probably considers it to be both embarrassing and a weakness. If he reveals this streak you, it is a sign that you have gained at least some measure of his trust. However clumsily he might put it, and however oddly out of character his words seem, do not make stupid remarks, dismiss the importance of whatever it is, or otherwise act like an ass. An oddly wistful ENTJ is still an ENTJ, and he will not appreciate it.

28) Don't tell him to calm down. Either you are mistaking his fervor for anger, or he is genuinely angry. If it is the former, he will be both confused and somewhat irritated at having been misunderstood. If it is the latter, telling him to calm down is counterproductive, as it will make him even more frustrated.

29) The ENTJ sense of humor is somewhat idiosyncratic. Be prepared for that. Don't feel obliged to fake-laugh, either. A fake laugh is generally obvious for what it is.

30) If he gets so frustrated that he starts ranting, listen. The wave will likely pass soon. If you can get him laughing, not only will it cut short the rant and put him back in problem solving mode, but he will appreciate it. (This is, however, a complex maneuver and if you don't want to try it, I really can't blame you.) Overall, xNFP, ENTP, and other ENTJs seem to be the best at doing this, although I have met some ESTJs who can do it, as well.

31) When in doubt, be Joe Friday from Dragnet. (Just the facts.) Give his Te something to work with.

32) If you want his full and undivided attention, phrase the point you're wanting to make in terms of how it will increase profits, decrease overhead, or otherwise improve the bottom line. Even "feely" issue (like morale) can be phrased in this way.

33) If you have one big thing to report in a written or electronic format, give him your analysis of events/the "take home message"/the TLDR version at the top, then go into details, and finally, append any supporting documents. This way, he won't have to sort through tons of stuff to get to the main thrust of your report, but can peruse the rest easily if needed.
 
Frankly, I work best when I can be in charge, when I'm given the autonomy and resources necessary to get something done. I'm good at handling problems and making tough decisions on a macro level, and I'm able to see potential in a lot of places people might not expect. It's important to know how to define and establish clear objectives--but also to keep your mind open to new possibilities that might work even better. Somehow I'm able to look at the different areas of a problem and compartmentalize them into tangible wholes and sequential steps--and from there it's just a matter of having the confidence, preparation, and skill sets necessary to follow through with your ambitions. I'm good at taking charge of a situation and optimizing its utility, which is something I take pride in my ability to do. It's important to me to organize and promote efficiency wherever I can, and I think sometimes people need to learn that there are times when their personal sentiments should be set aside if they're getting in the way of important progress. I often feel that people don't really understand or appreciate the full extent of my ambitions--but I stand up for my ideas and I support them with empirical facts. It's just a matter of visualizing a solution and implementing the steps necessary--if you're capable of doing something worthwhile, why shouldn't you?"

Sometimes mistaken for ESTPs for their aggressive confidence, often competitive nature, and emphasis on tangible action, ENTJs feel most at home when they:

A) Have the knowledge and skills necessary to perform efficiently,
B) Can visualize unique solutions to large-scale problems, and
C) Be given the administrative power to implement their ideas in practice.

The above list is, in itself, a nod to the concepts behind dominant Te: the way to get things done is to find out what the most successful people in the field are doing and break down that approach into concrete objectives, to cohesive steps and defined methodology. No burden of proof can match that of empirical evidence, the objectively measurable manifestation of the consensus of observable phenomena and the interpretations of the people who can show evidence that they understand it best. ENTJs are often much more ready to accept an idea when it's been quantified and systematized, and granted credibility by some manner of official recognition--presumably from the people who make it their business to know about whatever that area is, and who generate obviously tangible results from it. Numbers don't lie, and it's of the utmost importance to educate oneself about the standards and expectations by which logical and categorical evaluations are approached and granted collective value

Nevertheless, they tend to see difficult tasks as challenges that need to be studied, considered, planned carefully for, and strategically conquered. In this way, the structured nature of their dominant attitude illuminates the real difference from ESTP here: ENTJs are, above all, deliberate. They don't mince words and they don't like to waste time or energy. Given clear objectives and the necessary tools, ENTJs will finish what they start, and you can bet their work will meet all relevant regulations and industry standards. They may even feel like most (or worse, all) of the people around them lack the knowledge, confidence, or leadership ability to keep things running smoothly. It's no secret that they sometimes garner a reputation for being domineering and controlling, although this is not their intention: they simply feel a responsibility to take a leadership role when no one else around them can be trusted to do things right.

Like most Je dominant types, ENTJs tend to excel in management positions where they can be directly responsible for the coordination of various different departments or areas into larger and more cohesive functional wholes. This natural ability to control and govern resources gives rise to the characteristic Te desire for autonomy and self-sufficiency: the competence and self-restraint required to do achieve these ideals become points of pride for the ENTJ. There's a certain way the universe functions most effectively, they reason, and if you can't align yourself with the way things work on a globally objective level, you have no one to blame but yourself. If he cannot maintain autonomy, the ENTJ will be forced to make himself subservient to other (potentially far less efficient) methods of resource distribution. If there's one thing ENTJs dislike, it's being stuck working in a system or framework that could be improved or redesigned for better functionality, but having no authority or position from which to institute such improvements. They feel trapped, like they've solved the problem but its application is being blocked by nothing more than pointless bureaucratic red tape.