The Shepherd represents the predominance of Fe in a democratic type. Their natural mode is value judgement, based on objective criteria drawn from the environment; i.e. the needs and values of others. Thus, they are highly sensitive to their society, and responsive to the pain of its members. They are arguably the most civilized type, and, accordingly the most archetypally feminine. "Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet I will not forget thee." They are drawn, like a mother, by the instinct to soothe and smooth over the discomfort of others, maintaining and enriching the harmony of their feeling environment. As Harry S. Truman wrote in his diary, "I wonder why nearly everyone makes a father confessor out of me. I must look benevolent or else I'm a known easy mark…I like people and like to help 'em and keep 'em out of trouble when I can and help 'em out when they get into it."

Fe represents the "dance of feeling" as opposed to the "dream of feeling (Fi)." The Shepherd feels most comfortable when everyone joins in that dance. They need other people to "open up" to them, that is, to express themselves outwardly, in socially normal exoteric terms. In the same diary, Truman claimed, "The rule around here is that no one speak to the President. I break it every day and make 'em speak to me." The motion here is Fi → Fe. To have a "feeling dream" (Fi) is not itself a problem, and is even a great blessing, insofar as it means that one has a beating heart — but "men [should not] light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a candlestick; and giveth light unto all that are in the house." In other words, one must universalize their feelings, in order to share one's warmth with as many people as possible. The quality of the feeling is taken for granted, in order to emphasize the quantity. But this, the Shepherd argues, does not make feeling ingenuine; on the contrary, the process of universalization actually help purify or perfect one's feelings and values, like stones smoothed in a rock tumbler. It is good to feel love for a friend, but it is better to love many friends — thus one climbs Diotima's ladder from the particular dream to the universal dance. As Joseph Smith put it, "A man filled with the love of God, is not content with blessing his family alone, but ranges through the whole world, anxious to bless the whole human race."

Accordingly, the Shepherd's ideal is, at bottom, egalitarian. There cannot be favorites in the dance: "God is no respecter of persons." All special accommodations must be justified as means merely to reduce natural disadvantages, i.e. to make individuals ethically commensurate, to place them on the same playing field. Everyone plays by the same rules, and is thus accorded the same abundance of food and shelter; everyone is to be gathered into the same fold. The Shepherd wants the whole world to join in chorus, and would rather hear a whole congregation sing horribly than an elite choir sing perfectly.

Yet, at the same time, they remain sensitive to "off-key" actions — to impropriety, disharmony. Thus, their great struggle is between upkeeping traditional standards (Si) versus inclusiveness and equality (Fe). To make a category more inclusive, one has to change the category itself; it must become a different category altogether, though it be called by the same name. the Romans could not maintain a national identity when just anyone could become a Roman. Thus, the Shepherd struggles back and forth: when the one sheep wanders off from the ninety and nine, the Shepherd must either force the sheep back into the fold, or merely increase the radius of their territory, lassoing goats and wolves in the process, entangling them in the web of their social expectations.

This is usually the conflict between the Shepherd and the Alchemist: the Shepherd sometimes shepherds unwilling wolves. For, the Shepherd wants to see everyone as a sheep: they believe everyone is drawn out of the same, abstract whole; all lineages lead back to Adam and Eve; we are of the same species, of the same essential matter. This justifies "natural rights" by positing a universal "human nature." But for a type like the Alchemist, to posit a universal human nature (even for the purpose of guaranteeing fair treatment) is to melt every "beautiful and unique snowflake" into "the same decaying organic matter as everyone else…" "I am not a sheep!" they cry, "I am a wolf! I am not subject to your laws; I am free — and I have a free conscious about that!"

Thus, the Shepherd can become both the Good and the Terrible Mother — the one, when they sacrifice themselves to give another life (e.g. the female kermes ilicis, who shields her eggs with her dying body, and subsequently becomes her brood's first meal), and the other, when they reduce the unique and privileged into ubiquitous dust. It is the classic problem of the Oedipal mother, who does not allow her child to leave the protective city walls of democracy and find themselves in the monarchic wilderness "with the wild beasts." There is a thin line between embracing and smothering, between protecting and holding prisoner.

The Shepherd's sense of connotation is outward (with Fe), not inward. For them, an intuition is but a step away from schizophrenia. Accordingly, they fight against letting their intuitions sink too far into the quicksand of their psyche — they keep it on the surface, where it can discuss and mingle with the interpretations of others in their society: in this way, they hope to prevent intellectual inbreeding and the insulation of insanity. They are often proud of their openness to new ideas, and may idealize being "progressive"; they want their love and harmony to break down every fortress wall and bound over every forbidding rampart. Their tolerance in practice is, of course, a separate question, and it is tested by their encounters with Ni. The Shepherd does not trust what Ni dredges up from the abyss, no matter how it sparkles and shines. It is not natural; it did not originate with the community; it is a foreign agent, a slumbering alien, carrying the germs of disaster. And that is the irony of the Shepherd's openness: it is as broad as the whole earth, embracing very population — but it rarely penetrating downwards, into the idiosyncrasies of individuals. They discourage individual visions (Ni) for the sake of community harmony (Fe). And this can make them, to put the matter rather insultingly, like sheep themselves. But, as John Calvin warmed.
[God] taught us experientially what the end is of those who sin with the multitude, when He destroyed the whole human race with a flood, saving Noah with his little family, who, by putting his faith in Him alone, "condemned the world." In short, depraved custom is just a kind of general pestilence in which men perish not the less that they fall in a crowd.
Concerning their primitive function of Ti, we might begin with the words of Andrew Carnegie,
He is the happy man who feels there is not a human being to whom he does not wish happiness, long life, and deserved success, not one in whose path he would cast an obstacle nor to whom he would not do a service if in his power. All this he can feel without being called upon to retain as a friend one who has proved unworthy beyond question by dishonorable conduct.
As a friend of mine once said, "I don't have to like someone in order to love them." There is a certain coldness at the bottom of the Shepherd's love: the coldness of duty, obligation, and even "ethical calculation." On the other hand, the Te type works with externally validated rules; i.e. by rules dependent upon empirical information, i.e. contextual rules. The Shepherd struggles to integrate contextual efficiency into their program, for this requires a completely different form of analysis; it requires them to look out on the world as a subject within it, and not as a legislator above it. The Shepherd actually wants to be more efficient, strategic, effective in real-time, but this requires a loosening of their sacred rules and the ability to narrow their view. Efficiency (as opposed to pure consistency) requires selfishness and egocentrism. It also requires forgetting (i.e. selection) in favor of a goal. It requires intentional partiality, to determine what is dead weight and what is truly essential — even who is dead weight and who is truly essential.
Little Truths About ESFJs That They Want Others To Understand

ESFJs are often known as the hosts and hostesses of the Myers-Briggs world. They go out of their way to make sure that everyone is taken care of and are often very organized individuals. ESFJs are a type that has a few misinformed stereotypes floating around about them. We are here to abolish the charade and explain why ESFJs are truly wonderful people to have in your life.


They Care Deeply

ESFJs will invest all of their emotional energy into caring for their loved ones. They want to do whatever it takes to make them happy, regardless of what that means for themselves. The ESFJ wants to be supportive and strong for the people that they care about. They don’t always express their emotions, but they do feel them very deeply. They are affectionate and warm but sometimes they struggle to openly express themselves. The way that they express themselves is by tending to the practical and emotional needs of the people around them. They often care about everyone and we mean EVERYONE. They have a hard time not being compassionate towards people and want to do everything that they can to make others happy. The ESFJ cares about everyone but they do prioritize who matters most to them. They often have a mental list of whose needs should be met first. They want to be capable of juggling the needs of everyone around them, doing their best to make sure everyone is happy.


They Aren’t Actually Gossips

ESFJs are often stereotyped as shallow and gossipy. The truth is that most ESFJs avoid gossiping about others at all costs. They may confide in the people closest to them when they are frustrated, but this is not intended to be shared with anyone else. They want to make sure that they don’t hurt others and gossiping is something they find very hurtful. If they ever share anything about someone it is often to a person that they trust. The ESFJs main purpose is to make other people happy, not to hurt them. They are extremely conscious of how their actions will affect others, never wanting to do something that may harm someone.

ESFJs being seen as shallow is rather inaccurate. ESFJs are products of their environments, often responding to their surroundings. If they are around people who focus on more “shallow” aspects of life, the ESFJ will attempt to fit into that. If the ESFJ is around people who enjoy exploring new ideas and diving deep into their thoughts, they will be eager to do that as well. The ESFJ values deep relationships and are very committed to others. They are often very caring, wanting to do whatever they can to affect the people around them. ESFJs often feel hurt when they see others in pain, wishing that they could do something to help.

ESFJs are actually very passionate individuals, it is just that they focus this on others. They often have many things in their lives that they hold very close to them. They enjoy diving into the things that they enjoy, but rarely find the time to do this. Their level of caring for people often fuels a strong sense of passion inside of them. They may be held back sometimes, since they fear stepping out of their comfort zone. With the right person by their side, the ESFJ can jump into very exciting and intense new things.


They Give Until It Hurts

ESFJs often give more of themselves than anyone is really capable of. They will often spend their time organizing the lives of those around them. The ESFJ wants to make sure that everyone is happy and taken care of. Of course, trying to please everyone is an impossible task but don’t try telling the ESFJ this. They will expend every little bit of energy that they have, even when their energy source has run dry. They will often go out of their way to figure out what people need in their lives and work to acquire that for them. They remember the details about their loved ones, just in case these things become important later on. This may annoy others, since the ESFJ has a way of taking control of people’s lives. They integrate themselves into the daily needs of the people that they care about, as a way to help fix all of their problems. They only do this because they want to help, often being able to see what is “best” for everyone.

The ESFJ is often very organized and capable of maintaining many lists inside their mind. They know what needs to be done and attempt to juggle everything to accomplish their tasks. They also enjoy being able to keep up with social aspects of their world, doing their best to make sure that they are the social butterfly that everyone enjoys. They want to be friendly and likable, enjoying the chance to be around others. The ESFJ isn’t always as “extroverted” as some people may think though. They often are willing to drop back and allow others to be the center of attention. ESFJs enjoy balancing between being entertaining and allowing others to shine as well. They are more than willing to listen to what others have to say, observing their surroundings.


They Have Needs Too

ESFJs often are so focused on the needs of others, it may seem like they don’t have needs themselves. Obviously this is not true, the ESFJ has their own set of needs. They often neglect those needs in order to take care of others, which can become very draining over time. The ESFJ needs people around them who will be aware of them as well. When people are willing to take care of the ESFJ and show them just as much kindness as the ESFJ show others, it is greatly appreciated. When people actually are consciously trying to make the ESFJ happy, they can feel that very strongly. They will become even more giving towards someone who shows apperception towards them. They are loving and warm individuals, who simply love being around people that they care about.

Keeping harmony is important to the ESFJ. They may avoid conflict, this is not at all because they do not care. ESFJs simply feel unhappy and uncomfortable when there is conflict around them. They do their best to make things happy and harmonious in their environment. When things are not in order the ESFJ feels like this chaos is their own fault. They take it upon themselves, feeling they their best just isn’t good enough. ESFJs are much harder on themselves than they may appear, making it very hard when others put pressure on them.


They Become Emotionally Drained

ESFJs are social creatures, but they do become emotionally drained. They are often acutely aware of the emotions of others around them. This strong sense of other people’s feelings is nearly impossible for the ESFJ to shut off. They may attempt to ignore it, but the ESFJ feels everything very deeply. When someone around them is upset or stressed, the ESFJ often senses this. They want to do what is best for people, which makes them feel like they need to fix their emotional state. Because of this awareness, the ESFJ may become drained over time. When this happens they need some space and time to themselves. The ESFJ needs to be able to take a break from tending to the needs of others and just allow themselves to relax. It is unlikely that the ESFJ will take this time on their own, needing other people to force them into it. They have a very hard time saying “no”, feeling like people will not appreciate them if they do. The struggle is that when other people are in pain, so is the ESFJ.

Although the ESFJ is entirely focused on making others happy, they need people to care for them as well. An ESFJ will never tell you that they need help, but the truth is that everyone needs help sometimes. Being supportive of your ESFJ and working to make sure their needs are met, will go a very long way. Just showing that you care and attempting to take some of the weight off of their shoulders sometimes, will make them appreciate you even more. ESFJs are giving and caring individuals, who are well worth loving
This type description comes from Your Key to Sports Success (12th Edition, 2006) by Jonathan Niednagel. An updated edition is expected to be released later this year, and if you would like to know more about Jonathan Niednagel's Brain Typing system you can purchase the book from his web site, BrainTypes.com - Understanding for the new millenium.

FEAL / ESFJ "Facilitator"
hospitable, focuses on usefulness; energetic, realistic; develops and nurtures relationships; sensitive to praise and criticism; expresses feelings; conscientious; orderly; friendly promoter, commerce- oriented, gross motor skilled.

Is there someone you know who talks easily, conversing readily with each person he or she meets during the day? Is this person someone who is easy to call, sympathetic, helpful, warm, practical, and down to earth? Is his or her concern for people evident to all? You are probably thinking of an ESFJ. An ESFJ is friendly and outgoing, deriving energy simply from mingling with people. Choices are generally made by considering how issues will affect others. Seven years before her tragic death (in 1997), People magazine wrote of England’s ESFJ Princess Diana:
People magazine said:
People marvel at Diana’s bearing, her warm and knowing smile, her aplomb, and they wonder, where does it come from? The answer is simple. It is there all the time, locked away like a kernel, wanting only the sunshine of public adulation for it to unfold.
ESFJs express feelings easily. They radiate with confidence at social functions, enlivening the atmosphere wherever they go. They are natural hosts and hostesses, making everyone feel at home. ESFJs show their admiration readily, praising those they respect, defending their associates. They are devoted friends, using time and energy to keep up with their broad field of relationships.
As children, ESFJs are outgoing, rule following, and socially adept. They are high achievers, motivated early to pelase teachers and parents. They cooperate with structured programs, developing good study habits. At home, their strong wills may bring them in conflict with parental authority.
ESFJs are drawn to traditions and family. As nurturers, they need to be appreciated for their caring ways. They assume responsibility for the happiness and welfare of others, being harmonious and peacemaking. ESFJs are sought out for their willingness to listen, sympathetic hearts, and sensible advice. With practical knowledge of what to do, what to wear, and where to go, ESFJs actively assist others in need of direction.
Roger Singleton, representing a charity for orphans and handicapped children, spoke of Princess Diana in 1990:
Roger Singleton said:
The Princess is a person of compassion rather than a working royal who has so many events to get through a week.
John Mayo, director general of Help the Aged once said of Diana:
John Mayo said:
She has a keen sense of humor and puts people at ease.
ESFJs may avoid conflict to the point of permissive parenting or denial of the reality they know so well. There may be a situation that needs to be faced and dealth with. They may tend to want to be the “good guy” and let the spouse do the disciplining. Wanting things to run smoothly, the ESFJ will do much to pacify and compromise, and turn to self blame for problems that arise. As a spouse, however, the ESFJ can be quite domineering, wanting control over the family management. This is especially seen in wives who see the home and family as their area of responsibility and expertise
People magazine reported on Princess Di during her marriage to Prince Charles:
People magazine said:
Most people think that of the two – Charles and Diana – Diana is the one with steel. She’s her own woman, and she knows exactly what she wants to do, in the same way the Queen Mother did and does. She’s a very tough lady . . .
To be described as tougher than an INTJ like Prince Charles is to be a person of strong resolve, which ESFJs are.
The ESFJ, when faced with illness symptoms or difficult situations, may fear the worst will happen, denial no longer being possible. As people of action, ESFJs will make every effort to personally solve the dilemma, sometimes even when the business is not theirs to solve. They just see a need and “go to it.” Completion without delay is their goal.
ESFJs have a penchant for interior decorating and clothing style. Prince Charles once commented on Lady Di in a way that speaks of ESFJs:
Prince Charles said:
I like seeing a lady well-dressed. It was one of the things I always noticed about her before we got married. She had, I thought, a very good sense of style and design.
So we see ESFJs as harmonious, outgoing, talkative, conscientious, responsible, orderly, practical, hard working, and encouraging. ESFJs earn the confidence of others, selling themselves before selling the product or idea. The careers of ESFJs follow those serving humanity, people oriented occupations. Without a lot of personal contact, ESFJs will wither away, being frustrated at their role in life. If, however, ESFJs are surrounded by family and friends, they flourish and help run the lives around them with structure and care.

ESFJ Sports Profile

ESFJs are Extraverted, left-brained SFs. Exercising great control over their gross motor movements is what they do best. Whether in golf, basketball, tennis, figure skating, or bowling, they dominate with their big muscles. ESFJs can become very smooth in their motor movements, almost as if they were right-brained Ps. They can be very athletic. ESFJs, like ISFJs, tend not to pursue sports that instill fear. Therefore, basketball, tennis, golf, swimming, figure-skating, and so forth, are where they are often found.
Tennis’ Gigi Fernandez, ESFJ, was ranked as one of the top female doubles players in the world for over five years. (At the highest levels of tennis, ESFJs do best at doubles’ play.)
Figure skating’s Nancy Kerrigan, ESFJ, demonstrated her SF gross motor control, balance, and smoothness in the 1990s, culminating her amateur career with a silver medal at the 1994 Winter Olympics in Lillehammer. Few ESFJs have been top-notch skaters, but Nancy demonstrated what her Type can do through hard work, perseverance, and learning to control her anxiety level.
Not many ESFJs are high profile athletes in professional baseball, basketball, or football. Nonetheless, some have made their marks through determination and long hours of practice.
In football, defensive secondary specialist Mark Collins played a role on two New York Giants Super Bowl teams. The NFL veteran of over 10 years received All-NFL recognition. Defensive end and veteran Sean Jones made his presence known in the NFL for over a decade.
In basketball, ESFJs Rasheed Wallace, John “Hot Rod” Williams, and Bobby Phills have impacted the NBA.

Type Tips​
​
ESFJs, like all SJs, must be careful to keep tension at a minimum in athletic competition. Under pressure, as SFs, ESFJs will tend to tense the big muscles of the body, achieving too much control.
ESFJs, like all left hemisphere Js, should develop greater spatial awareness to improve their athletic skills.
Parents and coaches need to remember that all Feelers, including ESFJs, respond and learn best when they are treated with sensitivity, commended for their efforts, and encouraged to do their best.

Popular Career Choices:
Sales, customer relations, business, residential real estate agent, personnel supervisor, secretary, teaching (especially elementary level), special education, ministry, nursing, psychology, social work; in general, jobs where contact with people is involved.
Parenting skill for the ESFJ child will require parents who understand practicality,with a willingness to give repeated and sincere affection and affirmation.ESFJ, Extraverted with Sensing, Feeling and Judging parenting skill can be improved by understandingthat these ESFJ little ones need to feel loved and appreciated...all the time!
Firstly understand that this page is devoted to helping you as a loving parent or guardian, regardless of yourtype, better understand how to use your instinctive nature to improve your parenting skillby nurturing your child.
Your nature and your child's nature is your personality type and your child's personality type as discovered through the Myers-Briggs Test.
You may or may not be ESFJ; but, if your child is ESFJ than this page can guide you in developing outstanding parenting skill as you raise and interact with your ESFJ child.
You'll be introduced to several key personality characteristics of the ESFJ childand you'll be given some suggestions as to things to do that will improve parentingskill and help nurture your ESFJ child all through life.
We'll assume that you know your personality type and that your child is ESFJ...or youthink they are...here we go!!
Characteristics

Characteristics of the ESFJ Child-Some Behaviors to Look For:
Very happy, even optimistic babies
Lots of energy as babies
Very verbal and generally expressive
They like to run everywhere vs walking
Crave, need hugs, kisses, snuggles...physical expression
All their life, they value harmony, being appreciated and valued
Must have order and structure
Early, avid readers
Very cooperative, and competitive school children
Very artistic, paint, jewelry, crafts
Sometimes too social in school settings
Driving need to "fit in" won't lead necessarily
Strong tendency to be perfectionist
Any dis-harmonious situation will crush them
Strong need for relationships
Very caring, loyal...traditional children
Regardless of your type Mom and Dad here are some things you can do to nurture the ESFJ child and improveparenting skill.
Guidelines

Guidelines for the ESFJ Child:
Let them talk and be ready for lots of energy
Give them tons of physical affection, following their lead
hug them, kiss them, snuggle them
They will, but encourage them to express all of what they feel
Show them, be precise in what you mean for them to do
Try not to be too "up front" too forceful
They need constant praise and affirmation, see the negative don't dwell on it
Help them to see they don't need to rush decisions, options are ok
Be tactful with them as their feelings are dominant
In conclusion Mom and Dad, if you are ESFJ than most of the above seemed pretty naturaland may have brought back childhood memories; but, if you are not a Sensing Feeler (SF)or an Extraverted Judger (EJ) then maybe the above can better aid you as you developyou parenting skill.
The ESFJ is one of more common personality types in terms of distribution in America.About 10-12% of all Americans are ESFJ. About 14-17% of American females and about 5-7% ofmales are ESFJ. As you can see a bit more weighted on the female side!
