The Extraverted Sensation Type

No other human type can equal the extraverted sensation type in realism. His sense for objective facts is extraordinarily developed. His life is an accumulation of actual experiences of concrete objects, and the more pronounced his type, the less use does he make of his experience. In certain cases the events in his life hardly deserve the name "experience" at all. What he experiences serves at most as a guide to fresh sensations; anything new that comes within his range of interest is acquired by way of sensation and has to serve its ends. Since one is inclined to regard a highly developed reality-sense as a sign of rationality, such people will be esteemed as very rational. But in actual fact this is not the case, since they are just as much at the mercy of their sensations in the face of irrational, chance happenings as they are in the face of rational ones. This type—the majority appear to be men—naturally does not think he is at the "mercy" of sensation. He would ridicule this view as quite beside the point, because sensation for him is a concrete expression of life-it is simply real life lived to the full. His whole aim is concrete enjoyment, and his morality is oriented accordingly. Indeed, true enjoyment has its own special morality, its own moderation and lawfulness, its own unselfishness and willingness to make sacrifices. It by no means follows that he is just sensual or gross, for he may differentiate his sensation to the finest pitch of aesthetic purity without ever deviating from his principle of concrete sensation however abstract his sensations may be. Wulfen's Der Genussmensch: ein Cicerone im rücksichtslosen Lebensgenuss is the unvarnished confession of a type of this sort, and the book seems to me worth reading on that account alone.

On the lower levels, this type is the lover of tangible reality, with little inclination for reflection and no desire to dominate. To feel the object, to have sensations and if possible enjoy them—that is his constant aim. He is by no means unlovable; on the contrary, his lively capacity for enjoyment makes him very good company; he is usually a jolly fellow, and sometimes a refined aesthete. In the former case the great problems of life hang on a good or indifferent dinner; in the latter, it's all a question of good taste. Once an object has given him a sensation, nothing more remains to be said or done about it. It cannot be anything except concrete and real; conjectures that go beyond the concrete are admitted only on condition that they enhance sensation. The intensification does not necessarily have to be pleasurable, for this type need not be a common voluptuary; he is merely desirous of the strongest sensations, and these, by his very nature, he can receive only from outside. What comes from inside seems to him morbid and suspect. He always reduces his thoughts and feelings to objective causes, to influences emanating from objects, quite unperturbed by the most glaring violations of logic. Once he can get back to tangible reality in any form he can breathe again. In this respect he is surprisingly credulous. He will unhesitatingly connect a psychogenic symptom with a drop in the barometer, while on the other hand the existence of a psychic conflict seems to him morbid imagination. His love is unquestionably rooted in the physical attractions of its object. If normal, he is conspicuously well adjusted to reality. That is his ideal, and it even makes him considerate of others. As he has no ideals connected with ideas, he has no reason to act in any way contrary to the reality of things as they are. This manifests itself in all the externals of his life. He dresses well, as befits the occasion; he keeps a good table with plenty of drink for his friends, making them feel very grand, or at least giving them to understand that his refined taste entitles him to make a few demands of them. He may even convince them that certain sacrifices are decidedly worth while for the sake of style.

The more sensation predominates, however, so that the subject disappears behind the sensation, the less agreeable does this type become. He develops into a crude pleasure-seeker, or else degenerates into an unscrupulous, effete aesthete. Although the object has become quite indispensable to him, yet, as something existing in its own right, it is none the less devalued. It is ruthlessly exploited and squeezed dry, since now its sole use is to stimulate sensation. The bondage to the object is carried to the extreme limit. In consequence, the unconscious is forced out of its compensatory role into open opposition. Above all, the repressed intuitions begin to assert themselves in the form of projections. The wildest suspicions arise; if the object is a sexual one, jealous fantasies and anxiety states gain the upper hand. More acute cases develop every sort of phobia, and, in particular, compulsion symptoms. The pathological contents have a markedly unreal character, with a frequent moral or religious streak. A pettifogging captiousness follows, or a grotesquely punctilious morality combined with primitive, "magical" superstitions that fall back on abstruse rites. All these things have their source in the repressed inferior functions which have been driven into harsh opposition to the conscious attitude, and they appear in a guise that is all the more striking because they rest on the most absurd assumptions, in complete contrast to the conscious sense of reality. The whole structure of thought and feeling seems, in this second personality, to be twisted into a pathological parody: reason turns into hair-splitting pedantry, morality into dreary moralizing and blatant Pharisaism, religion into ridiculous superstition, and intuition, the noblest gift of man, into meddlesome officiousness, poking into every corner; instead of gazing into the far distance, it descends to the lowest level of human meanness.

The specifically compulsive character of the neurotic symptoms is the unconscious counterpart of the easy-going attitude of the pure sensation type, who, from the standpoint of rational judgment, accepts indiscriminately everything that happens. Although this does not by any means imply an absolute lawlessness and lack of restraint, it nevertheless deprives him of the essential restraining power of judgment. But rational judgment is a conscious coercion which the rational type appears to impose on himself of his own free will. This coercion overtakes the sensation type from the unconscious, in the form of compulsion. Moreover, the very existence of a judgment means that the rational type's relation to the object will never become an absolute tie, as it is in the case of the sensation type. When his attitude attains an abnormal degree of one-sidedness, therefore, he is in danger of being overpowered by the unconscious in the same measure as he is consciously in the grip of the object. If he should become neurotic, it is much harder to treat him by rational means because the functions which the analyst must turn to are in a relatively undifferentiated state, and little or no reliance can be placed on them. Special techniques for bringing emotional pressure to bear are often needed in order to make him at all conscious.
have some questions to figure out if I am really one :) Other types can reply as well if they experienced ESFPs or are well informed

1: Do you like to have your room clean? Like it can be cluttered a little but overall you have enough space at your desk, your floor etc plus you make your bed

2: I know ESFPs are the performers but is it possible for an ESFP to feel insecure about their talent which is why they prefer to not show that?
i play the piano and many people love it but I personally think I’m still pretty average because I never had a piano teacher etc that taught me stuff so I get pretty nervous when someone asks me to play a song irl
( I compose piano songs)
3: I heard ESFPS always want to have a pretty appearance tho can they be lazy with that sometimes?
4: Are ESFPS hardworking for things that interest them?
5: How does an ESFP with anxiety behave?

6: Can ESFPS repress their impulses and personality when they’re in an environment where people don’t care about what they think/ say? Let’s say the family?

7: Can ESFPs write things in a metaphorical way too sometimes? For example I tried to cheer a friend up who is sad and wrote them a letter in which I said:

''

It is okay to feel sad sometimes. Even the sun wants to hide behind clouds on some days and let them cry
but after some time the sun feels confident enough to peek outside again, welcoming everyone with a grande warmth that brings them joy

in some seasons the sun hides for very long time behind the clouds, it rains all day, everyday, for weeks, for some countries even for months.

but the rainy season always ends one day and a new season begins with a new start

plants need rain to grow and to become stronger. without rain everything would dry out and become terrible.

so rain is a very important part of life.

which is why the sun shouldnt forget that its allowed to cry sometimes
so it can heal and make life bloom and warm again''
​
This type, the "Swashbuckler", represents the predominance of Se in a wholly contextual temperament. They are built to be psychologically efficient. Ideally, they see, and then they do; any need to deliberate further is a sickness to be overcome, like a clogged artery or a jammed machine. They seem as though they would be more at home in Homer's Iliad or the Epic of Gilgamesh, than in our modern bureaucracies. They enjoy a very direct and raw coordination with the outside world; something happens and they respond according to their nature, like exhalations through a conch. Their impulsivity can be a force of nature; they become a mighty rushing wind, a crack of lighting, a joyful Doberman. And, like any natural phenomenon, they are innocent despite their dangerousness; one honestly wonders if they could have done otherwise than they did. They seem like a remnant of Old Testament man, or of mythological gods and heroes, whose deeds were mighty and melodramatic, whose affects and passions continually overflowed, who murdered and made love and cried mightily to heaven, all in the same hour. There is something highly sensual about them, something natural, naïve, earthy, and healthful. The antlike anxieties of modern man are foreign diseases for them, which they are prone to recklessly ignore only so they don't have to suffer the symptoms. They are too big-hearted, their liver is too strong, and their life-blood pumps through them rather too quickly. Everything must be supercharged with passion; everything in their life must be significant for them personally: the unexciting life is not worth living. They are the true romantics.

Starting from the "seen-and-done" represented by Si, they move into Se, the "here-and-now" taking place outside of them. They stride forth boldly from the cottage of their sheltered youth into the real world, to see it for what it "really" is. At the same time, their judgement is an inward motion, Fe → Fi, away from the general mores of the crowd, and deeper into their own cavern of selfhood. This kind of introspection tends to deplete their energy, and is only meant to serve their principle interest: experiencing the present moment. I.e., they are liable to forget what they actually want in lieu of what they actually see. The result is a boisterous irresponsibility. The Swashbuckler showers the world with blessings (and cursings) like an oriental prince casting handfuls of gold to peasantry, their left hand unaware of what their right hand doeth. And, insofar as Fi opposes Ti, we might say that, for the Swashbuckler, the here and now (Se) trumps rational consistency (Ti). Their sincerity in repentance is matched by the carelessness of their transgression. As Michelangelo mourned, "nor know I if a lower level in heaven is held / for the humble sin or the vaunting good," i.e. for carelessness or boastfulness. In either case, the trouble is an excess of energy. But Jesus, as if in reply, declares, "Her sins, which are many, are forgiven; for she loved much."

On a primitive level, the Swashbuckler's focus on the here-and-now is unconsciously tied to a worship of the hereafter and the soon-to-come (Ni). They sight, on the furthest horizon of the glimmering ocean, an oncoming ship, bearing gifts from Tomorrow. Much of what the Swashbuckler does in the present can be traced to their good hope in Tomorrow, to their unconscious apocalypse of Tomorrow's character and opportunities. This excitement for the future prevents them from getting too comfortable in an everyday existence, or in a routine, or in any traditions or scruples or personal hang-ups that might prevent them from being ready when that great and terrible ship arrives. For them, Truth lies on the horizon, not in the drudgeries of a nine-to-five. They live prepared, and even restless for, the coming of destiny. E.g., at the first hint of adventure and fortune, Squire Trelawny immediately makes idealized plans to seize it, dropping all his other affairs and requesting the same of his comrades. And, as with Trelawny, the Swashbuckler's readiness for the exciting future also curses them with an increased gullibility. They are too desperate to believe in the beautiful, to actualize the incredible, to participate in a great drama.

This leads into their hunger for practical effectiveness (Te). They want their rules to mean something in their lives. They seek to mobilize their resources in a rational way, to have a measurable impact on the world. In their perspective, the world is stultified with outdated laws and doctrines out of touch with present needs. Their hero's call (the inspiring function) is away from the dusty Ti academy, and out into the practical world of real action (Te). Out there, hairsplitting distinctions are a waste of resources; what matters is results, not rules. The level of precision should be dictated by the project at hand, not by an arbitrary rulebook.

In the words of Joseph Smith,
I never thought it was right to call up a man and try him because he erred in doctrine; it looks too much like Methodism…Methodists have creeds which a man believe or be kicked out of their church. I want the liberty of believing as I please; it feels so good not to be trammeled. It doesn’t prove that a man is not a good man, because he errs in doctrine.
Understandably, the Swashbuckler is often unpopular or controversial among academics, because they seem (or simply are) resistant to critical thinking. The Swashbuckler's energy requires of them a revolutionary ambition by which to express it, and this clashes with the tortoise pace expected of the scholar. In accord with their purely "masculine" temperament, they prodigally expend themselves upon the world around them, necessarily altering it in their image — like Nietzsche's Zarathustra, who cried, "I am weary of my wisdom, like the bee that has gathered too much honey…I want to give away and distribute…Bless the cup that wants to overflow, that the waters may flow golden from him and carry everywhere a reflection of your joy!"

For them, freedom is not the absolute capacity to direct the will in accord with rational law, but rather, as Schopenhauer described it, "the absence of all hindering and restraining," for, they take the direction of their will for granted. One's desires are not chosen, in some abstract, purely rational space; rather, they are a preexisting force that can be channeled rationally. They hunger, in other words, to be more rational in their exploitation of opportunity. They want to optimize life, not just intuitively, but according to principles adapted to their situation. As Aelred of Rievaulx related,
…torn between conflicting loves and friendships, I was drawn from here, now there, and not knowing the law of true friendship, I was often deceived by its mere semblance. At length there came to my hands the treatise which Tullius [Cicero] wrote on friendship, and…I was gratified that I had discovered a formula for friendship whereby I might check the vacillations of my loves and affections.
This is, at any rate, what they hunger for, and not what the necessarily get; rational planning, often times, requires one actually ignore ripe opportunities and eschew intuitions. Hence, Aelred also notes that, "I saw myself unfitted for that type of friendship…"

For the Swashbuckler, the terrible and unnatural face of Wakinyan is Ne: i.e. multiple perspectives, facets, approaches, interpretations — a multiplicity made possible because the subject's agenda is bracketed out. The Swashbuckler struggles to draw objective inferences, to enter a state of intellectual disembodiment, where the needs of their ego do not eliminate possibilities outright. In this specific sense, the Swashbuckler tends directly away from the Buddha when he said, "All things, O priests, are on fire…And with what are these on fire? With the fire of passion, say I, with the fire of hatred, with the fire of infatuation…[but] by the absence of passion he becomes free…" The Swashbuckler is a "man on fire." All their ideas and sensations burn with passion, with the strain of involvement and personal investment.
It's based on cognitive functions. ESFP has Se Fi Te Ni functions, so all will be mentioned here.

Se types:
Show a "tennis hop" brain pattern.
Easily go "in the zone" in a crisis situation.
Quickly integrate body and sensory information.
Easily bored and need external stimulation.
Focus on literal or common interpretations.
Favor details that are dramatic or in motion.

The "tennis hop" brain pattern is one in which all regions of neocortex out low amplitude and out of sync. This is an effective state that requires little energy while the shifting frequencies allow the brain to quickly direct whichever regions are needed for a surprise, incoming task.

Fi types:
Are consummate listeners who listen in a holistic way.
INFPs can deeply listen for up to 10 minutes at a time, ISFPs listen briefly and then move to action.
Show high activity in T3 and T4, which handle language.
Carefully compose their own speech, attending to both content and delivery.
Show high activity in F8, and are stimulated by rankings of importance.
Show the least activity in interior regions that aid logic.
Rely on left-brained (Fp1) decision making.

INFPs may get to the core of a person's psychology by listening for so long. INFPs are less likely to defend their own views or take action, though when they stop listening, region Fp1 becomes very active as they make a strong (and perhaps final) decision.

ISFPs are attentive when others withhold information (like social feedback).

Te types:
Show most efficient use of mental energy as they rely on evidence-based decision-making.
Rely on T3, O1, C3 and Fp1. Tend to use other areas very little, even on tasks that would normally invoke them.
Rely on measurably sensory information
Focus on goals and stimulated by task completion and error correction.
Tend to move to action before accurate or what-if processing, so quick efficiency can become a pitfall.
Show high activity in F8, which handles deeply felt personal values, often expressed negatively.
Female Te types show more diverse brain activity and are more responsive to social feedback.

IXTJs are more visual, attentive to tone of voice, and focus on implementation detail over quick decision-making. ESTJS attend more to details, are more open to brainstorming, and listen intently to authority figures. ENTJs can enter a creative mode similar to INTJs.

Ni Types:
Show a whole brain, zen-like pattern
Show this pattern when they attack an unfamiliar, novel pattern.
Their zen state works best when focusing on a single question, without distraction.
Enter the zen state when ask to envision the future.
Usually benefit from a sensory focus

Their whole-brain, zen-like pattern occurs when all regions of the neocortex are in sync and dominated by brain waves that are medium-low frequency and very high-amplitude. Other types only show this pattern when they engage in their specific area of expertise, unlike Ni-ers, who also show it when tackling a new problem.

ENxJs usually benefit from a physical or sensory focus. NJs tend to be generalists compared to their SJs cousins.
All functions besides shadow ones are mentioned here. ESFP uses all them, but preference is for dominant one. Then auxilarity, tertiary and inferior comes in. It means, that Se description holds most truth for ESFP most of the time, but other function descriptions should be read for better understanding.
Thus, their great challenge is to divest themselves of the personal, to actually clear their mind, to gaze into their crystal ball without a specific question on their mind, to simply gaze and see what appears, to watch the universe spin all 360 degrees around; in short, to master the art of nirvana, the "blowing out" of the flame.
ESFPs are fun and delightful to be with. They live for the moment, and know how to make the most of each moment. They are genuinely, warmly interested in people, and love to make others happy. They're usually very kind-hearted and generous, and are always going out of their way to do something nice for someone. Their affection is simple, straight-forward and honest. They dislike theory and complexities. They often resist forming relationships which require them to function on a high Intuitive or Thinking level. They prefer for things to be light and happy, although their warmth and affection runs deep. Their potential downfall is the tendency to live entirely for the present moment, and therefore to sometimes be unaware of the direction that their relationship is heading, or to be easily distracted from long-term commitments.

[HR][/HR] ESFP Strengths

[HR][/HR]

Enthusiastic and fun-loving, they make everything enjoyable
Clever, witty, direct, and popular, people are drawn towards them
Earthy and sensual
Down to earth and practical, able to take care of daily needs
Artistic and creative, they're likely to have attractive homes
Flexible and diverse, they "go with the flow" extremely well
They can leave bad relationships, although it's not easy
Try to make the most of every moment
Generous and warm-hearted

[HR][/HR] ESFP Weaknesses

[HR][/HR]

May be frivolous and risky with money
Tend to be materialistic
Extreme dislike of criticism, likely to take things extremely personally
Likely to ignore or escape conflict situations rather than face them
Lifelong commitments may be a struggle for them - they take things one day at a time
Don't pay enough attention to their own needs
Tendency to neglect their health, or even abuse their bodies
Always excited by something new, they may change partners frequently

[HR][/HR] ESFPs as Lovers

[HR][/HR] "To love means to open ourselves to the negative as well as the positive - to grief, sorrow, and disappointment as well as to joy, fulfillment, and an intensity of consciousness we did not know was possible before." -- Rollo May


ESFPs embrace their love relationships in a Big way - similar to the way they approach their lives in general. They love to be in love, and will try to make the most of each moment. They take things on a day-by-day basis, and are uncomfortable thinking too much about the future, or making plans far in advance. For this reason, ESFPs are not natural long-term commitment people. They may feel tremendously committed on a day-by-day basis, but they do not naturally plan for their futures.


This commitment issue is a potential pitfall for the ESFP. Many people of this type overcome this potential weakness, and become involved in truly satisfying, lifelong relationships. Others do not address this weakness, and move from relationship to relationship without forming real commitments, convincing themselves that this is what they truly want.


Sexually, the ESFP is a very earthy and sensual individual who seeks and enjoys intimate contact with their partners. Living in the here-and-now, they throughly embrace and enjoy the experience with all five senses. They are generous and warm, and highly interested in making their partners happy.


ESFPs tend to be materialistic, and somewhat caught up in "what others think" of them. They should take care that this doesn't interfere with their personal relationships, since many of the others types will not be able to relate to their perspectives on these matters.


ESFPs do not handle conflict well at all. They take any sort of criticism very personally, and consider it to be a general indictment of their character. They may react with anger and harsh words which they would later like to take back. ESFPs would do themselves a favor if they would come to realize that criticism can be looked at constructively, rather than destructively. If they can hear criticism without feeling personally threatened, the ESFP will have come a very long way towards greatly improving the strength and health of their relationships.


ESFPs are extremely literal and concrete when communicating. They say things in a very direct, abrupt manner, and can sometimes even unintentionally seem quite harsh. They like things to be communicated to them in a similar, concrete fashion. They dislike theory and abstraction, and will frequently misunderstand the jist of a communication if it is not communicated in a factual, present-tense manner. Discussions regarding the future or the past are not the ESFP's strong suit, and in fact they're likely to miscontrue future-looking statements as something that needs immediate attention. When they discover that the discussion is not regarding an immediate concern, they become disinterested.


ESFPs are in general very warm and giving people, with simple needs and demands from their partners. They just want to be happy, and want to bring happiness to others. They are energetic and popular individuals who will liven up the social life of the couple, and keep many new experiences on the horizon.


Although two well-developed individuals of any type can enjoy a healthy relationship, ESFP's natural partner is the ISTJ, or the ISFJ. ESFP's dominant Extraverted Sensing function is best matched with a personality that is dominated by Introverted Sensing. How did we arrive at this?
