No other human type can equal the extraverted sensation type in realism. His sense for objective facts is extraordinarily developed. His life is an accumulation of actual experiences of concrete objects, and the more pronounced his type, the less use does he make of his experience. In certain cases the events in his life hardly deserve the name "experience" at all. What he experiences serves at most as a guide to fresh sensations; anything new that comes within his range of interest is acquired by way of sensation and has to serve its ends. Since one is inclined to regard a highly developed reality-sense as a sign of rationality, such people will be esteemed as very rational. But in actual fact this is not the case, since they are just as much at the mercy of their sensations in the face of irrational, chance happenings as they are in the face of rational ones. This type—the majority appear to be men—naturally does not think he is at the "mercy" of sensation. He would ridicule this view as quite beside the point, because sensation for him is a concrete expression of life-it is simply real life lived to the full. His whole aim is concrete enjoyment, and his morality is oriented accordingly. Indeed, true enjoyment has its own special morality, its own moderation and lawfulness, its own unselfishness and willingness to make sacrifices. It by no means follows that he is just sensual or gross, for he may differentiate his sensation to the finest pitch of aesthetic purity without ever deviating from his principle of concrete sensation however abstract his sensations may be. Wulfen's Der Genussmensch: ein Cicerone im rücksichtslosen Lebensgenuss is the unvarnished confession of a type of this sort, and the book seems to me worth reading on that account alone.


On the lower levels, this type is the lover of tangible reality, with little inclination for reflection and no desire to dominate. To feel the object, to have sensations and if possible enjoy them—that is his constant aim. He is by no means unlovable; on the contrary, his lively capacity for enjoyment makes him very good company; he is usually a jolly fellow, and sometimes a refined aesthete. In the former case the great problems of life hang on a good or indifferent dinner; in the latter, it's all a question of good taste. Once an object has given him a sensation, nothing more remains to be said or done about it. It cannot be anything except concrete and real; conjectures that go beyond the concrete are admitted only on condition that they enhance sensation. The intensification does not necessarily have to be pleasurable, for this type need not be a common voluptuary; he is merely desirous of the strongest sensations, and these, by his very nature, he can receive only from outside. What comes from inside seems to him morbid and suspect. He always reduces his thoughts and feelings to objective causes, to influences emanating from objects, quite unperturbed by the most glaring violations of logic. Once he can get back to tangible reality in any form he can breathe again. In this respect he is surprisingly credulous. He will unhesitatingly connect a psychogenic symptom with a drop in the barometer, while on the other hand the existence of a psychic conflict seems to him morbid imagination. His love is unquestionably rooted in the physical attractions of its object. If normal, he is conspicuously well adjusted to reality. That is his ideal, and it even makes him considerate of others. As he has no ideals connected with ideas, he has no reason to act in any way contrary to the reality of things as they are. This manifests itself in all the externals of his life. He dresses well, as befits the occasion; he keeps a good table with plenty of drink for his friends, making them feel very grand, or at least giving them to understand that his refined taste entitles him to make a few demands of them. He may even convince them that certain sacrifices are decidedly worth while for the sake of style.


The more sensation predominates, however, so that the subject disappears behind the sensation, the less agreeable does this type become. He develops into a crude pleasure-seeker, or else degenerates into an unscrupulous, effete aesthete. Although the object has become quite indispensable to him, yet, as something existing in its own right, it is none the less devalued. It is ruthlessly exploited and squeezed dry, since now its sole use is to stimulate sensation. The bondage to the object is carried to the extreme limit. In consequence, the unconscious is forced out of its compensatory role into open opposition. Above all, the repressed intuitions begin to assert themselves in the form of projections. The wildest suspicions arise; if the object is a sexual one, jealous fantasies and anxiety states gain the upper hand. More acute cases develop every sort of phobia, and, in particular, compulsion symptoms. The pathological contents have a markedly unreal character, with a frequent moral or religious streak. A pettifogging captiousness follows, or a grotesquely punctilious morality combined with primitive, "magical" superstitions that fall back on abstruse rites. All these things have their source in the repressed inferior functions which have been driven into harsh opposition to the conscious attitude, and they appear in a guise that is all the more striking because they rest on the most absurd assumptions, in complete contrast to the conscious sense of reality. The whole structure of thought and feeling seems, in this second personality, to be twisted into a pathological parody: reason turns into hair-splitting pedantry, morality into dreary moralizing and blatant Pharisaism, religion into ridiculous superstition, and intuition, the noblest gift of man, into meddlesome officiousness, poking into every corner; instead of gazing into the far distance, it descends to the lowest level of human meanness.


The specifically compulsive character of the neurotic symptoms is the unconscious counterpart of the easy-going attitude of the pure sensation type, who, from the standpoint of rational judgment, accepts indiscriminately everything that happens. Although this does not by any means imply an absolute lawlessness and lack of restraint, it nevertheless deprives him of the essential restraining power of judgment. But rational judgment is a conscious coercion which the rational type appears to impose on himself of his own free will. This coercion overtakes the sensation type from the unconscious, in the form of compulsion. Moreover, the very existence of a judgment means that the rational type's relation to the object will never become an absolute tie, as it is in the case of the sensation type. When his attitude attains an abnormal degree of one-sidedness, therefore, he is in danger of being overpowered by the unconscious in the same measure as he is consciously in the grip of the object. If he should become neurotic, it is much harder to treat him by rational means because the functions which the analyst must turn to are in a relatively undifferentiated state, and little or no reliance can be placed on them. Special techniques for bringing emotional pressure to bear are often needed in order to make him at all conscious.
AVID COOK / GAMER / READER


Jennywocky said:
there he goes again, "Stone-Cold Stephen: That Jaded Bastard."
​

 
Reactions:
counterintuitive, Agent Blackout and LotusBlossom
SaveShare
Like
Sort by
Oldest first
A
Agent Blackout
1980 posts · Joined 2012
#2 · Apr 24, 2012
To further expand on Stephen's post, in terms of context, here is a verbatim excerpt from Chapter 10 of Carl Gustav Jung's work "Psychological Types" (1921):


=============================================


(III) THE PECULIARITIES OF THE BASIC PSYCHOLOGICAL FUNCTIONS IN THE EXTRAVERTED ATTITUDE


6. Sensation


Sensation, in the extraverted attitude, is most definitely conditioned by the object. As sense-perception, sensation is naturally dependent upon the object. But, just as naturally, it is also dependent upon the subject; hence, there is also a subjective sensation, which after its kind is entirely different from the objective. In the extraverted attitude this subjective share of sensation, in so far as its conscious application is concerned, is either inhibited or repressed. As an irrational function, sensation is equally repressed, whenever a rational function, thinking or feeling, possesses the priority, ie. it can be said to have a conscious function, only in so far as the rational attitude of consciousness permits accidental perceptions to become conscious contents; in short, realizes them. The function of sense is, of course, absolute in the stricter sense; for example, everything is seen or heard to the farthest physiological possibility, but not everything attains that threshold value which a perception must possess in order to be also apperceived. It is a different matter when sensation itself possesses priority, instead of merely seconding another function. In this case, no element of objective sensation is excluded and nothing repressed (with the exception of the subjective share [p. 457] already mentioned). Sensation has a preferential objective determination, and those objects which release the strongest sensation are decisive for the individual's psychology. The result of this is a pronounced sensuous hold to the object. Sensation, therefore, is a vital function, equipped with the potentest [sic] vital instinct. In so far as objects release sensations, they matter; and, in so far as it lies within the power of sensation, they are also fully accepted into consciousness, whether compatible with reasoned judgment or not. As a function its sole criterion of value is the strength of the sensation as conditioned by its objective qualities. Accordingly, all objective processes, in so far as they release sensations at all, make their appearance in consciousness. It is, however, only concrete, sensuously perceived objects or processes which excite sensations in the extraverted attitude; exclusively those, in fact, which everyone in all times and places would sense as concrete. Hence, the orientation of such an individual corresponds with purely concrete reality. The judging, rational functions are subordinated to the concrete facts of sensation, and, accordingly, possess the qualities of inferior differentiation, i.e. they are marked by a certain negativity, with infantile and archaic tendencies. The function most affected by the repression, is, naturally, the one standing opposite to sensation, viz. intuition, the function of unconscious perception.
The previous eight types were "pure" types, because they did not mix the contextual or universal axes. The following eight types, however, are "hybrid" types, or mixtures of contextual and universal. In fact, one can view each "hybrid" type as a mixture of two other, specific types. The Maverick, for instance, represents the Se dominance of the Swashbuckler combined with the enmity of Fi found in the Devil's Advocate. Like the Swashbuckler, they closely follow and exploit present opportunities, but unlike the Swashbuckler, they are guided in this pursuit by cold Ti reasons, not by Fi ideals. As Plutarch said of Alexander the Great, "[he] was stubborn when it came to resisting compulsion, [but] he was easily led by reasoned argument to the proper course of action…" This combination makes the Maverick a dangerous soul, in the best or worst senses. They are direct and unsentimental. They are the Devil's Executioner, either for him or of him — her Honor, Judge Reason, decides. "Now you know why they call me 'Dirty Harry' — every dirty job that comes along."


Unlike the Swashbuckler, the Maverick considers themselves accountable to laws of reason, so that argument and persuasion (rather than empathy and cajoling) are the best means of approach. The Swashbuckler finds Ti persuasion to be dehumanizing, like a bloodless bureaucrat evicting them from their ancestral home. Meanwhile, the Maverick finds Fi condescending; they protest, "Speak with me as an adult, as an equal, as a rational agent like yourself! If you are going to evict me, very well, but if your paperwork is not in order, I will make full use of my right to retaliate." In this way, they are using principles of rational consistency and Kantian fairness in order to defend their personal sovereignty. As Malcom X said of his youthful conception of Islam, "There is nothing in our book, the Koran, that teaches us to suffer peacefully. Our religion teaches us to be intelligent. Be peaceful, be courteous, obey the law, respect everyone; but if someone lays a hand on you, send him to the cemetery. That's a good religion."


The Maverick is like an immigrant trying to integrate into a surrounding culture without losing their own. They want to be respected precisely for their differentness: as a kind of sage or far traveler, offering wisdom from strange lands only they have dared to travel. They love to relay unconventional wisdom from their life, and in this way become a contributing citizen of unique distinction. More often, however, society finds the Maverick difficult to swallow: they are an indigestible rock that must be vomited up.


A dramatic example was the infamous philosophic pornographer, the Marquis de Sade, who spent the last decade of his life imprisoned for his books. He protested, "Yes, I am a libertine, that I admit. I have conceived everything that can be conceived in that area, but I have certainly not practiced everything I have conceived and never shall. I am a libertine, but I am neither a criminal nor a murderer…" The point is not whether Sade's last claim is true, but rather that he felt compelled to make it, to explain himself, to make himself more palatable to society — without actually compromising his worldview. As Simone de Beauvoir wrote of him,
Can we, without renouncing our individuality, satisfy our aspirations to universality? Or is it only by the sacrifice of our individual differences that we can integrate ourselves into the community? …In Sade [those] differences are carried to outrageousness, and the immensity of his literary effort shows how passionately he wished to be accepted by the human community.
The Maverick is only half universal, and this is experienced as a sense of alienation from the laws of reason to which they ascribe. They feel like an extrarational agent consenting to or rejecting certain laws or "rulesets." In other words, they are actualizing those rulesets, the rulesets are not actualizing them; and they resent the idea it could be otherwise (i.e. that they are merely a statistic in someone else's head). Hence, a paradox: they want to act rationally, but they don’t want to be predicable; and, on the other hand, they want to be an exception to rationality, but they don’t want to be treated as a child or animal. In short, they want to be special, but they also want to be "one of the guys." So, they seek out actions or stunts through which they can awe the crowd (Se) without also losing their favor (Fe), and they often teeter in and out of the crowd's good graces. Usually, Se sabotages them: they go too far in one of their stunts, miscalculating the audience's reaction.


The Maverick is so well adapted to the present moment that they can construct a fantastically convincing façade for any occasion. But it is only a façade; it has no universal validity, only contextual effectiveness. As Foucault so memorably put it, "Do not ask me who I am and do not ask me to remain the same: leave it to our bureaucrats and our police to see that our papers are in order." This can leave one with the impression that nothing substantive lies behind the Maverick's Se-Fe mask, that they are "whited sepulchres, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men's bones," or as Hunter S. Thompson said of Richard Nixon, "he was a foul caricature of himself, a man with no soul, no inner convictions, with the integrity of a hyena and the style of a poison toad." And it is true that sentimental ideals (Fi) do not restrain them from exploiting present opportunities (Se); but as with Dirty Harry, this very lack of sentimentality allows the Maverick to do what is right or best regardless of its moral repugnance or inconsistency from a more universal standpoint. They can make the hard calls, and they can make them quickly.


The Maverick will change the rules of a game in order to win. Unlike the Thinker or Devil's Advocate, who see many possible rulesets at once, the Maverick senses only the best possible ruleset to employ, given their present conditions. This is an expression of their primitive Ni, or (to say essentially the same thing) of their sub-primitive Ne. the Maverick struggles to weigh all possibilities impartially; in fact, they struggle to hold more than one possibility in their mind at a time — not because of any mental deficiency, but because their Ni has, as it were, already chosen the best possibilities for them, and to pretend as though the other possibilities seem equally viable is a waste of time. What they accordingly lack in Ne planning they make up for in Se brutality and blitzkrieg. Like Alexander the Great, they simply cut the Gordian knot rather than untying it. Se, as it were, collapses the electron probability cloud of Ne, forcing an actual decision upon the world. The Maverick is, in this regard, quite impatient: they do far better on the battlefield than in war councils. They snap, "Get on with it!" or "Get to the point!" As George Patton was heard saying, "A good solution applied with vigor now is better than a perfect solution applied ten minutes later." A wonderful illustration of this is found in Plutarch's account of Alexander the Great's first engagement with Darius' forces:
Darius' commanders had gathered together a considerable army and deployed it at the crossing of the river Granicus…[Alexander] plunged into the river with the thirteen cavalry squadrons…this seemed to be an insane tactic, reckless and ill-advised. Nevertheless, he persevered with the crossing. It is said that 20,000 foot-soldiers and 2,500 horseman died on the Persian side, while…losses among Alexander's men amount to thirty-four dead…
[After this victory, Alexander] was undecided about what to do next. He was often attracted to the idea of meeting Darius and gambling everything on the outcome of the encounter…
The Devil's Advocate plays chess by laying out every possible move. Their metagame is cognitive: "I can juggle more possible outcomes than you; no matter what you do, I have a solution." They play chess primarily in their mind. But the Maverick plays chess on the board; their metagame is essentially physical — I have quicker reflexes than you; no matter how suddenly an obstacle appears, I can react in time." They cannot outthink their opponent, but they can outshoot them. Of course, under such a philosophy, many a negotiation is reduced to a shootout. The Maverick may emerge victorious, but only at an unnecessary cost. Their predicament is essentially the same as the Swashbuckler's: they must learn to see more than straight ahead, to consider more than the one possibility, to breath, to let the lustful flame extinguish, if only for a time.
"As much as I can, I try to keep moving at all times. I have to be involved in something exciting and I get bored easily if there's not some kind of challenge to conquer or new area to explore and figure out. When I see an opportunity to try something new, I tend to jump in with both eyes open and just deal with whatever happens. I'm really good at adjusting to whatever is going on around me--I know how to impress people and I like it when I'm able to show off my skills and gain recognition for my abilities. I'm really competitive and I'll usually put a lot of energy into whatever I'm doing. I get annoyed with silly or pointless rules and I tend to ignore them when they get in the way of whatever I'm trying to do. Sometimes I can be so directly aggressive that my bluntness and high energy level can even offend people, but I'm usually not really trying to upset anyone (although I'm not above occasionally prodding people for reactions--it's all in good fun.) I just need a lot of freedom to get involved in a lot of things and interact with a lot of people, and if I can't feel the level of energy and excitement that I need, I'll just move on to something else. I have a kind of natural way with reading people, too--I can just look and listen and figure out what they're doing. I don't like spending a lot of time talking about or planning things when I could be experiencing them instead--whatever problems may come up, I can always figure them out when I get there. I just have to get moving! I respect people who can back up their words with real actions--nothing gets the point across better than getting out there and doing it. If you're not willing to go out and show the world what you're made of, how can you ever expect to have any real impact on anything?"


As Se dominants, ESTPs are, of all types, among the most directly engaged with their external sensory environments. Constantly scanning their surroundings for sensory information and opportunities to respond, adjust to, or interact with it, ESTPs tend to be easily recognizable by virtue of the fact that their primary value system makes a point of making itself obviously and tangibly apparent to others through direct sensory stimuli and universally understandable direct impact. The stereotypes commonly associated with ESTPs--that they need constant stimulation and action--are not, in most cases, far from the truth. Characteristically disinterested in that which is not immediately applicable to the situation at hand, the ESTP's aggressively confrontational demeanor and emphasis on objectivity may result in some difficulty with distinguishing him from the similarly aggressive ENTJ. The primary difference, of course, is that ESTPs are motivated by different primary goals and mindsets than ENTJs--while the latter is more intently focused on long term strategic planning, seeking to control his environment and promote efficient resource distribution for deliberately planned ends, the former is inspired primarily by a desire to feel connected to and in tune with the sensations of his surroundings.


ESTPs want to feel actively engaged as often as they can--and while they may superficially resemble ENTJs in terms of their blunt interpersonal style and desire for tangible action and measurable impact, their approach is, on the whole, far less methodical and substantially more focused on the experience itself than on its long term strategic implications. ENTJs think, plan, focus, deconstruct, and evaluate--ESTPs simply act when the external conditions of the moment call for it. While ENTJs tend to insist on planning for every contingency, ESTPs trust their natural adaptability and instinct for opportunity to guide them toward the right action when the right time comes. Unlike ENTJs, they often cannot explain how or why they choose the right moment for action--they simply see it when it happens and act on it before the window of opportunity closes. They live not in the world of abstraction and organizational efficiency, but in that of bold actions and instantaneous reactions. They are the ultimate tactical responders, and they show little patience for procedural standards or regard for what they see as unreasonable rules or restrictions on their freedom to act and respond in whatever way makes the most sense at the moment.


Like their ESFP cousins, ESTPs know how to impact the senses of others around them. They're often seen as the go-to people when their friends and family want to know what's fun and interesting, and they tend to have an unusual flair for the nuances of presentation and visual style. Less scrupulous ESTPs may not be above saying whatever they know their audiences want to hear in order to get to whatever it is that they want. Their constant high-stimulation lifestyles and characteristic personal charm and charisma may often make them the life of the party, true purveyors of "the good life." ESTPs will rarely shy away from a challenge, and they're typically willing to take substantial risks in favor of pushing toward whatever they've set their sights on. Often, it's not so much the goal itself as the thrill and challenge of its pursuit that attracts the ESTP persona. As life-long high-wire dwellers, most ESTPs try their best to live life without boundaries: life is a high-risk, high-reward proposition, and they play to go broke or win big.




Auxiliary: Introverted Thinking (Ti)


"A little more moderation would be good. Of course, my life hasn't exactly been one of moderation."
--Donald Trump, ESTP


As an auxiliary function, Ti serves the primary purpose of balancing out dominant Se's prodigious appetite for new and exciting experiences by lending the ESTP a greater sense of the depth involved in true mastery of the skills and hobbies he tends to center his life around. It's easy for the young ESTP to fall into the trap of becoming a "jack of all trades, but a master of none"--naturally talented in a wide variety of different areas, and heavily invested in competing and besting his competition, early life may find ESTPs having difficulty choosing any particular area of focus. Because they tend to operate most effectively in situations where their quick instincts and on-the-spot resourcefulness lead to success, the time and dedication required to develop serious long-term skills on a deep level may strike them as boring, uninteresting, or simply not worth the time investment. As Ti introduces itself into the ESTP's cognitive system, she gradually begins to reach two key realizations: one, that real success requires the development of genuine expertise in specific areas, and two, that a sense of universal fairness and consistency is vital to her ability to look at herself in the mirror and feel comfortable with the way she deals with life on a day to day basis.


Unfortunately, less balanced ESTPs tend to create a negative reputation for the whole type in terms of impulsive/aggressive behavior, brash arrogance, and poor self-control. While these qualities certainly tend to characterize the more immature end of the ESTP spectrum, it's important to note that development of auxiliary Ti tends to balance out and rectify these issues in most cases. Many new or less experienced typologists may have never even met a truly well-rounded ESTP, and may hold inaccurate impressions of the entire type as unscrupulous pleasure-seekers with little regard for much beyond their own immediate gratification and desire to explore, conquer, and indulge. As Ti develops, ESTPs will see in themselves a gradual increase in their sense of personal integrity--they will begin to realize that their talents carry great responsibilities, and that if they wish to criticize others for failure to maintain personal consistency, they must uphold a certain code of honor for themselves as well as others around them. Despite the common stereotypes, the balanced ESTP is capable of discerning which situations warrant personal restraint, which people are worthy of his respect, and which opportunities are truly worth taking advantage of without forcing himself into roles and habits that he cannot truly respect himself for. Sometimes, the wisest move is to back down, to walk away, to retreat into oneself and reflect on a sense of universal truth and innate human values. Via Ti, the ESTP discovers himself and defines his personal boundaries and limitations.


It's worth noting that, unlike the NTP types, ESTPs do not tend to apply Ti toward formal logic or hypothetical argumentation. While they do enjoy a good competition, they may grow irritated and impatient quickly with what they see as irrelevant hypothetical discussion and continual argumentative posturing. (In this way they are easily distinguishable from ENTPs, who will play devil's advocate and dance conversational circles around both friends and foes purely as a means of exploration and entertainment.) When ESTPs do engage in arguments, it's generally a function of removing whatever obstacle (most often another party in disagreement) is preventing them from getting back into the action where they feel most at home. In most cases they'd much rather get back to doing something that makes a tangible and objectively obvious difference to something in the outwardly observable world. Some may even use argumentation as an outlet for their natural competitive drives, but this may confound other types who can't seem to find any rhyme or reason in the argument itself--for the ESTP, it's just another form of generating external stimulation, of directing the external world toward a more actively engaging scenario in which dominant Se can do what it does best. There's rarely any intention of proving any particular theoretical point, because theoretical points are rarely the point. In lesser moments of clarity, excessive Se may use argumentation as a means of proving its bravado or physical presence, its immediate influence on the perceptions of the surrounding audience. Talk is cheap--actions will always speak louder than words.


Nonetheless, ESTPs with strongly developed Ti may display somewhat unexpected command of dense technical and theoretical material when they can see its direct application to one of their areas of interest. It's important to recognize that, while they may tend to avoid by-the-book approaches and theoretical rhetoric in most cases, they're not fundamentally against abstract conceptual approaches--they just need to see a realistic application for them, some sort of obviously apparent reason that such abstruse language need be applied. The typically action-oriented ESTP may surprise and even astound friends and colleagues with unexpected mastery of technical jargon or conceptual ideas--as long as she can see how they relate directly to the activities she's constantly immersed in. Once an idea on paper is given realistic and tangible context, the connection between external sensory response (Se) and internal logical modeling (Ti) grants an all new level of meaning and completeness to the ESTP's mastery of the hands-on skills at which she finds herself most naturally adept.




Tertiary: Extroverted Feeling (Fe)


Most commonly, tertiary Fe seems to manifest itself in the ESTP through a gradual replacement of self-centered hedonistic tendencies with a deeply felt sense of loyalty toward one's familial responsibilities, friendships, and cultural heritage. This sudden burst of interest in sticking up for the virtues of "my people" may seem bizarre and out of place to outsiders, as the ESTP (typically in early adulthood) begins to recognize, and perhaps even feel guilty over, his obligations to the people that keep his life moving in the exciting direction to which he's become accustomed. It's not uncommon to see young ESTPs in the process of Fe development show unprecedented (and often quite unexpected) displays of affection and warmth for their loved ones--while those loved ones look on in bemused but pleasant surprise as the brash and competitive ESTP they're used to begins to turn over a new leaf and display his more caring and compassionate side.


It's quite common for ESTPs to be utterly oblivious to how little positive feedback and appreciation they show overtly for the people they care about. They may simply assume that those close to them know how important they are, and their insistence on a constantly active lifestyle may preclude them from providing the sort of emotional support that most people require higher doses of than they do. Indeed, others may wonder if their ESTP friend or family member even cares about them at all--the sudden introduction of Fe is often marked by confused or exaggerated emotional outbursts that lack context or nuance, as most ESTPs possess at least a rudimentary awareness of their emotional shortcomings, and are more than a bit insecure about their ability to show the true depth of their appreciation for the people that matter to them. They may end up filtering Fe through their preferred Se perspective, showing their appreciation through powerful displays of visual or other sensory flash and showmanship. While these responses may appear on the surface to be simple attempts to garner attention, there's often a less pronounced (but very real) desire to express and validate interpersonal camaraderie wrapped up in the ESTP's grand displays and gestures. Especially among male ESTPs, there may exist a certain anxiousness that more straightforward explanations of emotion may produce an undesirable appearance of weakness or excess sensitivity, which tertiary Fe fears may lead to social isolation and lack of any real companionship. The resultant behaviors can be confusing, to say the least.


When Fe is granted too powerful a position in the ESTP's cognitive hierarchy, she may overreact to perceived displays of disloyalty, and feel especially inclined to aggressively counteract this perceived betrayal through an increasingly disturbing series of oneupmanship games. Without a strong Ti perspective to balance out the subjective world, the SeFe loop ESTP can become entirely too wrapped up in the opinions of others, struggling constantly to balance her social image as cool and exciting (Se) against the moral and ethical expectations of her peers (Fe). When the two meet head on without the aid of auxiliary Ti, often the only solution that occurs to the beleaguered ESTP is to further increase her externalized displays of status and power, indulging in aimless hedonism and overreacting to the slightest loss of approval among her peer group. Trapped between her role as trend-setting entertainer and the increasingly uncomfortable realization that her life requires more externalized ethical structure, the SeFe ESTP may experience substantial difficulty in finding any cohesive balance between these disparate sides of her personality.


When developed properly, tertiary Fe should balance itself against auxiliary Ti to provide more than an additional tool for persuading and manipulating others into doing the ESTP's bidding. It adds a sense of genuine affection, of legitimate responsibility and selflessness, to the ESTP's total cognitive worldview. With a better defined sense of context for defining his social and interpersonal roles, the ESTP will learn to identify situations in which making the maximum sensory impact is not always the most important priority--he'll learn to introduce practical responsibilities and a sense of structure into an otherwise hectic and unpredictable lifestyle. In touch with the needs and expectations of his closest allies, the Fe-savvy ESTP will proudly symbolize all the best characteristics of his culture and community (and still keep an eye on stylistic impact in the process.)




Inferior: Introverted iNtuition (Ni)


The infamous inferior function of the ESTP cognitive makeup comes in the form of introverted iNtuition--that mysterious and elusive world of internalized perception of symbolic meaning and privatized significance. While the world of immediate literal meaning and split-second instinctive responses comes as naturally as breathing, that of deceptive or hidden significance strikes the ESTP as so foreign, so uninviting, so irrelevant and esoteric as to be completely avoided at all costs. In Se's world, that which is directly observable speaks volumes--while that which is implied or subtly suggested is rarely worthy of immediate attention. The Ni approach seems to conflict with all discernible standards by which the ESTP conducts himself and his associations with the world surrounding him: when he wants recognition, he draws attention to himself. When he wants to convey a message, he says outright what he means. Anything less seems puzzling at best, and utterly illogical at worst.


In practice, inferior Ni tends to manifest itself in the form of inexplicable claims of seemingly supernatural insight into areas in which the ESTP clearly has no direct knowledge or evidence. When confronted with a threatening situation which forces him to call upon his inferior attitude, the gradual realization that his preferred direct and straightforward approach will no longer serve him adequately accompanies an increasing nervousness and mounting insecurity. Forced to adopt an intuitive approach with which he is uncomfortable and compete in an arena in which he is brutally outclassed, the ESTP may conclude that, in order to remain genuinely competitive, he must do what he perceives Ni types to be doing--what is actually a relatively systematic and predictable process of pattern perception and anticipation appears to him as a totally haphazard and unsubstantiated system of random guesswork and logical non sequitirs. Missing the central point of the Ni dominant's approach, he will respond to threatening situations by assuming he must "start over" and eliminate all perceptual assumptions, giving rise to all sorts of absurd and nonsensical perceptions about the secret motivations and hidden implications in everything and everyone around him.


Worse yet, dominant Se's desire to continually adapt to changing external conditions may result in a woeful inability to maintain depth of focus on one area long enough to intuit its true significance. In his attempts to imitate what he sees as irrational leaps in reasoning, he himself may become irrationally suspicious of the motives and intentions of everyone around him, entrenched in self-indulgent cynicism, increasingly isolated from the world of sensory call and response where his cognition finds itself most comfortable. The gut feelings upon which he bases his reactions--normally rooted in concrete sensory data continually updated in real time--will give way to bizarre and unsubstantiated intuitive hunches: when his trusted gut instincts continually turn out wrong, utter perceptual disorientation is unavoidable. Detached from the constant stream of concrete external information upon which his preferred outlook depends so heavily, the ESTP in the grip of inferior Ni may feel as if none of the information upon which he normally relies can any longer be trusted to provide any real sense of context or valuable input. He descends into paranoia and dreaded inaction, convinced that any attempt at a rational response will result in predetermined and unavoidable failure.


In time, inferior Ni can eventually approach the other function attitudes in terms of its application in a positive and useful light. The most balanced ESTPs will eventually learn to appreciate the internal world of symbolic imagery, and may even learn to enjoy its profound subconscious effects on their perception as the unconscious gradually moves toward the realm of conscious control. While this level of development is unusual and often inordinately difficult, the ESTP who commands it will surpass her peers in terms of cognitive balance and total perspective. Gradually building awareness of the unstated meaning, the perceptual road less traveled, the fully self-actualized ESTP ceases to be a slave to the perceptual expectations of her surroundings. Fully capable of realizing and completely understanding her own potential and the far-reaching implications of her words and actions, she will leave her mark on the world in a far more long-lasting and significant manner than she ever believed realistically possible
If you are "down", "out", or "on the way there", you are in need of the companionship of an ESTP. If you really want to be cheered, you won't be "down" for long. Outgoing, witty, charming and cheerful - these are the hallmarks of the ESTP. Extremely close behind are the characteristics of generosity and fun-loving. When they walk into a room, the sun begins to shine!


Among the most socially sophisticated, ESTPs are at home in the spotlight. Their ease with people and in front of people is the envy of other extraverts and introverts alike. Their resourcefulness leads them to be able to handle most awkward situations. They truly are so charming that it is difficult to shun them, remain angry with them or to forget them. Even kids absolutely adore them!


They are able to weather some very "heavy-duty" personal "hits"! How? Like most ESs, they "go with the flow". VERY optimistic even when the clouds are fairly dark over head, they are able to maintain a positive attitude that "things are going to get better". Most times, after having been in their company for some time very well spent, others are surprised to hear some time later that things were not going very well for the ESTP.
Extraordinarily open-minded, they are thus enabled to befriend, accept and be truly comfortable with many who would discomfit others. To be in their presence is to know true and open acceptance - they are able to separate behaviour from the person in such a way as to not "throw the baby out with the bath water".


Lest you gain the impression that ESTPs are perfect, let's take a reality check here. Are they perfect? Well, if you are not the one who is eye-ball to eye-ball with the ESTP but are waiting for them, you had better move on if you have another appointment. What's the problem here? Well, while ESTPs are giving undivided attention to the one who IS eye-ball to eye-ball - warm, interested, cheerful and unhurried attention, the one waiting is left "cooling their heels", chafing at the bit at being "stood up" or overlooked again! And the ESTP isn't even bothered. Why? Because they are so generous, outgoing and even-handed that they aren't "bent out of shape" if the roles were to be reversed!


And another thing. They are again so objectively accepting of others, that they are clearly able to see all points of view and are also able and willing to articulate that fact - which is maddening to someone who would rather be agreed with or is looking from a friend for support for their already carved-out stance. Trouble is, most ESTPs are generally friends of or friendly towards the other people, too.


Clever, very diplomatic and brilliantly resourceful, master at "reading" non-verbal behaviours, they are able to do and to say "the hard thing". They are the ones who are brought in to do the "heavy-lifting" of downsizing, reformulating policy, making presentations to "higher-ups", deal objectively with all the emotional stuff.


As with other ESs, novelty is intriguing and stimulating...new experiences, foods, people, ideas make life exciting. ESTPs enjoy laughter, talking, playing. They, too, are fun-loving, with non-judgmental natures but are not likely to be abused as they are objective and not subjective, prefer thinking to emotion and are more apt to prefer reality over the abstract. Their heads are not in the clouds. They can take a lot, but when they are done...they are done.


The ESTPs enjoy people which makes them fun to be with and they are generally good conversationalists with a wide range of interests.


Children love them and they make super parents who are less disciplinarian than are SJs - being able to "play" at the child's level and to really know what it "feels like" to be a child...for, in a strange way, ESTPs have many attributes of the child, which include being accepting, open-minded, outgoing, interested in learning and able to drop the old and move on to the new.


Again, as with the ESFPs, ESTPs don't like to be asked to deal with the abstract. They, too, much prefer what they can see, touch, taste, smell and hear: hands-on experiencing. Intuition and visualizing are not strong points and it is difficult for them to "imagine". They much prefer concrete examples to help them to understand.
Sports, concerts, people-things are pleasing for ESTPs like spontaneity and activity. Spontaneity makes them feel "alive". Games in which they can "win" appeal to them also - particularly those which involve skill, activity, spontaneity and resourcefulness.


This same approach goes with them into the business arena, too, which is not always appreciated. ESTPs prefer to wait until "the last moment' to prepare that report, to check on supplies, to "get ready". Yeah, they are procrastinators, but with a purpose, even an unconscious one: they really love the pressure of last minute deadlines, for their resourcefulness is called to the fore and they just love "landing-on-their-feet" when just
hours before not much had been done at all - much to the amazement of team members or family members or friends. Well, amazing to some, but VERY discomfiting and alarming to others who prefer the more orderly, timely and fore-planned approach schedules. But this is their way and it generally works for them.


ESTPs can become depressed if they feel they have failed. They don't like to.


Likable and liking to like, somewhat non-conformists but not "in-your-face" rebellious, accepting and cheerful, easy-going and enjoying, intelligent and resourceful, engaging and friendly, ESTPs are more than welcome additions in life's arena of hard knocks. They bring a warmth and delight that is rare to our midsts and we are all gladdened and encouraged by their cheerful presence.
