In the Alchemist, Ni predominates. Ni is the shamanic or prophetic function: from a given set of objective data, it forms a subjective inference, mapping implications into the future, along the secret currents that drive the world. It is not unlike an expert marksman eyeballing a shot; instinct and intuition play far more of a role in the process than the Alchemist is usually ready to acknowledge. And, because these intuitions are subjective, and tied up with the Alchemist's very being, they tend to defend and promote them as they would their own physical life. When this is combined with the willfulness of Te / Fi, the Alchemist emerges as a "tenacious visionary oriented towards action."

The Alchemist is a lofty dreamer, but with pragmatic ambitions. "Philosophers have hitherto only interpreted the world in various ways; the point is to change it." There is a curious unity between thought and action in this type. The name "Alchemist" connotes a position between science and magic, dream and reality: a transcendent position, where imagination itself is harnessed to raise and raze towers and cities. As John Maynard Keynes said of Isaac Newton, "[He] was not the first of the age of reason. He was the last of the magicians…" Tesla, the great eccentric genius, related how in his adolescence, a "professor declared that I could never create such a motor…[but] I took courage and began to think intently of the problem, trying to visualize the kind of machine I wanted to build, constructing all its parts in my imagination." They seek to make their visions working actualities.

With their eyes, they pierce the veil of Maya, and with their hands, they retrieve its noumenal secrets and prepare them for the microscope. They would "draw out leviathan with a hook…[and] take him for a servant forever," never mind that "the hope of him is in vain…None is so fierce that dare stir him up," for the Alchemist is so fierce. Indeed, they would defy the established order, in order to bring fire to mankind. They are extraordinarily independent spirits, who sooner or later cannot bear the presumed authority of an unworthy intellect. The Alchemist's monarchic temperament affords them the tremendous benefit (and potential disaster) of insulation from public opinion. Thus, the Alchemist grows used to seeing things for which only they seem to have eyes.


Thus, first and foremost, we see the exchange Ne → Ni. The Alchemist quickly (perhaps hurriedly) reviews the possible options, and intuits whichever will serve them best. Furthermore, they value the capacity to synthesize a wider and wider circle of different ideas into the same purpose, to manage the greatest disparity of radii between the top and bottom of their funnel. But the idea that someone would widen the this circle of perspectives for its own sake baffles and even irritates them. Nietzsche puts the matter in fascinating terms:

    All acting requires forgetting…A man who wanted to feel everything historically would resemble someone forced to refrain from sleeping, or an animal expected to live only from ruminating and ever repeated ruminating…there is a degree of insomnia, of rumination, of historical sense which injures every living thing and finally destroys it…
    The stronger the roots of the inmost nature of a man are, the more of the past he will appropriate or master…such a nature would draw its own as well as every alien past wholly into himself and transform it into blood, as it were…this is a general law: every living thing can become healthy, strong and fruitful only within a horizon.

Sometimes it seems as though anything could be reinterpreted in their favor, melting into them like metal in a furnace. For, they are not preeminently logical, but purposeful, beings. They think in terms of points: linearly, instead of laterally. As Nietzsche noted, "There are terrible people who, instead of solving a problem, bungle it and make it more difficult for all who come after. Whoever can't hit the nail on the head should, please, not hit it at all." The rapidity by which the Alchemist grasps the points of thing, "stepping from summit to summit," is not explicable through Ni alone: it is encouraged in its (often) reckless speculation by the clarion call of Fi. The Alchemist's own desires fill in the gaps left empty by the data actually at hand. As Roy Harrod said of his colleague John Maynard Keynes, "He held forth on a great range of topics, on some of which he was thoroughly an expert, but on others of which he may have derived his views from the few pages of a book at which he had happened to glance. The air of authority was the same in both cases."

The material that fuels Ni and Fi is provided by Te and Se. internal connotation is fueled by external denotation. "Data! Data!" cried Sherlock Holmes. "I can't make bricks without clay!" Accordingly, the Alchemist tends to "materialize" everything, i.e. reduce everything to public, observable facts for their Te and Se to apprehend, and the Ni and Fi to digest. They brusquely sweep away the social layer of verification, and close the gap between the man and the clay. They want to get back to the basics, they want to see things for themselves. E.g., Martin Luther elevated the scriptural text above catholic traditions and priestly authority, Nietzsche insisted that no spiritual plane gave secret meaning to the material one, and Marx declared that all social and political institutions are entirely derived from material realities

Understanding the real essence of INTJ children is a difficult task because they are not always easy to figure out and are almost impossible to control. All INTJs prize themselves on their individuality and on the uniqueness of their ideas and their thinking. Their most striking and highly developed characteristic is their inner vision and the internal connections they make. Intensely private, they do not like to be figured out, yet while they make not act like it, they do want their parents to understand them. But parenting, understanding, and accepting INTJs can be as rewarding as it is challenging.

The examples that follow are drawn from stories of real children. But since all people are unique, your INTJ may not demonstrate all of the characteristics described or may not demonstrate them with the same degree of intensity. But if your children really is an INTJ, most of what you read should sound strikingly familiar.

I found this highly amusing and pretty damn accurate.

How to handle an INTJ

Here's a concise guide (mostly based on decades of personal observation:)) on how to survive first contact with an INTJ. Don't take it too seriously but ignore it at your own peril (not a bad disclaimer, he, he).

Expect debate. INTJs enjoy tearing things apart to understand them and to prove (or disprove) their worthiness.
They will gladly argue a point they don't actually support, just for the sake of argument or to probe things. This bears repeating: an INTJ can easily and persuasively assume a point of view which is wholly contrary to his actual conviction. If in doubt, ask.
INTJs do have a strong sense of humour, often dry and quick, but also a bit warped. It can easily take a morbid streak.
Expect blunt, honest, sometimes even hurtful answers: if you don't want to hear the truth, you wouldn't ask, would you?
INTJs like to do lists, enumerations, pattern sorting and putting things into an ordered state (ordered for them, not necessarily for the rest of the world).
Statements you can't back up with either solid facts or solid reasoning will at best be ignored and at worst poked fun at in ways not many people would describe as nice.
Try to be both concise and precise. Using 81 woolly words where 18 sharp ones would suffice will not endear you to them.
They do love wordplay though: if you can re-package your 81 woolly words in a witty, unexpected, esoteric fashion, they'll appreciate that.
Don't expect an INTJ to respect anything you (or some other authorities) say just because you (or some other authorities) say it. INTJs bow to one authority only: rationality.
For an INTJ truth is more important than simply being right, so they will readily admit errors or mistakes (once they have been convinced something they said or did was indeed wrong — to convince them may not be easy though). INTJs unfortunately expect others to work likewise (and react bewildered if they don't).
Stick to a statement after being proven wrong by facts or reasoning and an INTJ will treat you as an irrational idiot and everything you say as probable nonsense.
Try not to be repetitive. It bores them to death.
Clumsy attempts at political correctness and similar aberrations will greatly amuse them

INTJs believe in constant growth in relationships, and strive for independence for themselves and their mates. They are constantly embarking on "fix-up" projects to improve the overall quality of their lives and relationships. They take their commitments seriously, but are open to redefining their vows, if they see something which may prove to be an improvement over the existing understanding. INTJs are not likely to be "touchy-feely" and overly affirming with their mates or children, and may at times be somewhat insensitive to their emotional needs. However, INTJs are in general extremely capable and intelligent individuals who strive to always be their best, and be moving in a positive direction. If they apply these basic goals to their personal relationships, they likely to enjoy happy and healthy interaction with their families and friends.
