As Kristeva points out, abjection blurs the boundaries between object and subject. From the 5w4’s point of view, this would ultimately mean blurring the boundaries between the objective and detached nature of 5 mixed with the more sensible and subjective nature of 4. However, because the core is 5, emphasis is on detachment. 5w4 art is therefore highly impersonal with a focus on seeking knowledge and understanding to deflect the fear of 5, especially in relation to oneself. The fascination for abjection seems to embody the fear of 5w4 when looking from the outside. The 5w4 is not a subject as would be the case with 4, but it is not entirely an object either as would be the case with 5. Instead it is something in-between; the existence of 5w4 equals abjection itself. The abject personifies the way the 5w4 views and understands the world, especially in relation to the ego. Not quite an object, not quite a subject. This is why abjection is often expressed by being repulsive, morbid and grotesque: human but not quite. Understanding the abject therefore provides understanding of the ego which is a strong desire in 5w4. as the 5w4 INTP seems to experience oneself as being a liminal existence.

Abjection and the INTP
The fascination for the abject can perhaps best be explained by looking at the INTP. Not only is there a strong correlation between INTP and enneagram 5, but more emotional INTPs tend to often turn up as 5w4 and confuse themselves for INFPs. This is part because of the nature of inferior Fe which has a strong desire to connect and is one of the driving functions that helps the INTP to develop an emotional life. It is also common that INTPs that are 5w4 have a high and well-developed Fi which is not too surprising, and that many of them are interested in the arts and are artists themselves. However, INTPs are still Ti-dominant and are thus ruled by subjective logic and emotional detachment. This often results in the INTP taking upon an attitude of: humans are just machines made out of flesh. Here we can already see the subjectivity of enneagram 4 merging with the dominant objective perspective of 5. The end result is therefore neither man nor machine but a man-machine.

The driving forces behind this perception seem to lie in the general INTP-outlook of the world being Ti-dominants, and expressed in the constant struggle to connect with the world itself through inferior Fe. Indeed, the 5w4 is called the Iconoclast, and the iconoclast does that – attacks and breaks down what’s established making it abject. Dictionary.com defines iconoclast as:
What is important to understand about enneagram 5w4 is how 5w4 is expressed in art. Because the core of 5w4 is the detachment and objectivity of 5, the art of 5 tends to often be impersonal in nature. Emphasized with the desire by 4 to feel unity, enneagram 5w4 is often expressed in a search for connection. As with 4, 5w4 feel that the ego is defined not by what one is, but what one is not in contrast to everyone else. The internal logic of the 5w4 becomes "If am what you are not". It is this logic along with the detachment of 5 that makes the art of 5 often appears as cold, twisted and dark. Whereas the 4w5 is expressed with the emotional warmth of 4 at the core, there is no warmth in 5w4 art. I also want to stress that the differences between 4w5 and 5w4 is the direction of connection - 4w5 focuses on the internal self, to modify the self to fit into an ideal to reflect the 4's ideal of Holy Origin, whereas 5 is pointing outwards like 5 always does which reflects the 5's ideal of Omniscient. Another way to describe 5w4 art is to therefore call it abject, first defined by Julia Kristeva: 
I guess more than anything I just want things to make sense. I frequently feel like most people around me make decisions based on totally irrational criteria and it's hard to see how they can miss the basic building blocks of common sense logical reasoning and decision-making. I like to work with systems, especially theoretical systems of ideas that represent concepts that interest me--the more complex and interrelated, the better. There's something aesthetically appealing about designing and reworking systems; creating symmetry that suggests a sense of total systemic completeness is something that brings me a lot of enjoyment. It's really important that things remain fair and consistent--if I don't feel I'm being treated fairly or reasonably, I will speak up and explain in detail exactly what's wrong with the flawed reasoning that's being used against me. I go to great pains to maximize clarity and conceptual precision when I'm dealing with others, and I expect them to do the same. If I can't establish a clear definition of an idea, then how can I connect it meaningfully to anything else?"

INTPs firmly believe that conceptual analysis and evaluation is not for the faint of heart. What they're after is no less than absolute correctness, definitional precision, and universal truth. Almost quixotic in this idealistic search to grasp the nature of everything, INTPs believe everything can ultimately be defined, categorized, and succinctly systematized into a single unified conceptual picture--even if that degree of completeness is not something humankind can ever expect to achieve.

Unlike INTJs, who resist strict conceptual definition until empirical evidence renders it indisputable, INTPs must categorize and define their ideas into clearly distinct blocks before they can even begin a discourse or exchange of information. Dominant Ti creates such a keen awareness of definitional specificity that INTPs often garner a reputation for nitpicking that borders on neurotic and may drive other types up the wall. (After all, you can't spell "nitpick" without "INTP".) And while they may sometimes abuse this ability in order to play games with others or establish their own intellectual superiority, more often than not, they simply recognize definitional differences to a much finer degree of detail than most other types are even capable of discerning. Until we know precisely what our words denote and connote, we can't even make
INTPs most often find work in areas where they can apply their sense of internal structural identity to complex systems of ideas where they can broaden the scope of a problem and discover a new area in which to work out all of the intricate relationships that make up the defining characteristics and total framework thereof. For Ti, practical application is rarely much of a concern; INTPs are in the business of idea development for the sake of learning and cerebral expansion. If they can map out an area of reality that as of yet lacks definition, INTPs may find a sense of purpose by feeling they've contributed to the development or clarification of humankind's understanding, demystifying something previously not understood.

It's hard to overstate the importance of fitting everything in the universe and the entire realm of existence into Ti's overarching sense of the total causality of all the relationships, properties, and axioms that make up the definition of everything involved in life as we know it. When a new piece of information contradicts Ti's previously understood rule set, there is no choice but to retreat into private introspection until the inevitable error in reasoning is discovered and the causal chain of deduction repaired, checked, and double checked for consistent flow of rhetorical integrity. Each piece of a system implies the necessity of other pieces filling counterbalancing but symmetrical roles: with enough If/Then statements and explanations of possible conditions and situational exceptions to them, literally everything can ultimately be mapped out and explained and shown to adhere to a global sense of logical predictability. The universe cannot function any other way. If we're still running into wrong conclusions, it's either because we started with bad premises or we haven't created enough subsections of systemic explanation yet: either way, the answer always lies in further analysis and reevaluation.

Like all Ji dominant (IxxP) types, INTPs are, above all, people of principle, and they will defend those principles to the death (especially if you try to debate them!) The search for truth outweighs any transient cultural values, transcends any perceptual bias or interpretive difference, renders irrelevant any lesser or arbitrarily chosen values, and represents the ultimate ideal to which all should feel privileged to have even the most fleeting encounter with. It is of vital importance to the INTP to seek knowledge purely for the sake of understanding, and to uphold his sense of logical integrity in the process. Anything less would be, well, illogical.
The Thinker is ultimately a kind of Conscience, but with the emphasis on the rational justification instead of remembrance. They need, almost desperately, to know "Why?" and for the answer to make sense across contexts. As Locke said, "There cannot any one moral rule be proposed whereof a man may not justly demand a reason." Or, as Kant complained, "On all sides I hear: 'Do not argue!' The officer says, 'Do not argue, drill!' The taxman says, 'Do not argue, pay!' The pastor says, 'Do not argue, believe!'" The Thinker scorns the despotism and nepotism behind, "Because I said so," or "Because that is how I feel." Such answers strike them as dumbfoundedly infantile, because it fails to distinguish one's own ego from everyone else's.

Just as the Alchemist refuses to bow to the madness of the homogenous crowd, the Thinker refuses to bow to the whims of heterogenous individuals. Like Saint Peter before the Jewish council, they declare, "We ought to obey God rather than men." By obeying God (or, Reason, Natural Law, Logic, etc.), they build the arc that will save them from the oncoming storms of life; for, Noah was taught, not by fellow men, but by a personal God, the exact specifications for that otherworldly ship, at which the world laughed until their lungs filled with water. The arc was thoroughly sealed with pitch, inside and out; in the same way, the Thinker is anxious to seal off every loophole in their mental constructions, so it might withstand every possible contingency of reality. From their point of view, this process is equivalent to discovering the bedrock, or something utterly unshakeable, upon which they might found their edifices (e.g. Descartes' rationalist project). They are, in a sense, searching for some true but hidden Being behind all contingent experience, for something truly Real. In this respect, Parmenides is their patron saint, because he founded his house on the pure, inner statement of Being itself: A = A or A ≠ not A. this is the most basic expression of subjective denotation (Descartes' Cogito amounts to the same).

Obviously, they feel the need for great caution and meticulousness in their reasoning. The Thinker cannot, in good conscience, put down as law what is merely expedient, for expediency has no guarantee of lasting. One has only kicked the can further down the road; nothing real has been found beneath the fluttering veils of experience. Thus, the Thinker is not one to sacrifice precision or integrity for accessibility or popularity. To reach such a high peak in their reason, the Thinker must build an equally high scaffold; i.e. give their principles a sufficiently high level of abstraction. They abstract the matter onto a truer plane, into a truer language. In effect, the Thinker performs sublime acrobatics of diction and syntax to express "properly" what is normally expressed in popular parables, fables, or idioms. As Nietzsche joked, "Kant wanted to prove, in a way that would dumbfound the common man, that the common man was right

The Devil's Advocate uses laws (Ti) to ask better questions (Ne); the Thinker uses questions to develop better laws. Skepticism is the means towards an inner assurance of reality, i.e. Si. But the inspiring function is never satisfied; in fact, its satisfaction is sabotaged by the higher functions, like a child who, running over to pick up a shiny toy, accidently kicks it further away. Thus, the Devil's Advocate seeks social harmony by disrupting it, and the Thinker seeks inner peace by requiring rationality as its condition. Thus, the Devil's Advocate is opposite the Artist, who will not converse with them and the Thinker is opposite the Swashbuckler, who will not be governed rationally, chasing after present opportunities. The Thinker, in contrast, denies that the present (Se) can offer anything not already covered by their laws (Ti).

A solution for the Thinker is judged by the robustness of its interior structure, not by its present effectiveness in the field. "Colored lights can hypnotize / Sparkle someone's eyes." This, combined with the roving eye of Ne, usually makes them appear as "absent-minded professors," cooped up in their mental libraries rather than playing with the other children. What they therefore lack in social graces, they make up for with their mental prowess — the grueling patience of an archeologist, piecing together primeval skeletons from a thousand fragmentary findings. Such mosaics of evidence are more convincing to them than any immediate sensation; they "gaze steadfastly at absences that, to the mind, are presences nevertheless."

First, then, we have Te → Ti. Both functions are reasonable, but the one is externally confirmed, and the other internally confirmed. The Thinker's attitude is nicely represented by John Locke, who said, "Those who have read of everything are thought to understand everything too; but it is not always so. Reading furnishes the mind only with materials of knowledge; it is thinking that makes what we read ours." The Thinker does not reject external results like the Conscience does; but they are almost always considered auxiliary to the internal organization of Ti. Ti must digest Te. While Te judges something trustworthy precisely because it has nothing to do with their own mind, Ti only trusts information after they have confirmed it for themselves in their mind; they must think upon it, ruminate it, and make it their own, i.e. properly integrate it into their rational model of the universe. For, "mere common sense proves a treacherous guide in the field. " One must earn one's reason; everything must be thought through

By digesting the universe in this way, the Thinker founds it on a sounder basis: their own mind. The external world has no basis: it is a realm of chance. But the mind is capable of absolutes; thus, "except our own thoughts, there is nothing absolutely in our power." Thought itself becomes the Being or bedrock mentioned before: an internally validated existence, an existence provided by the subject before any objects; thus, a reality closer to the dictates of reason, rather than contingency (Descartes' account of the melting wax, quoted in chapter 2, is a useful example). But, as we saw with Parmenides, to escape all contingency is to empty the thought of content, and become pure form. And the purer this form becomes (i.e. the safer it becomes as a deductive basis), the more it resembles a mere tautology.

For the Thinker, Fe represents the unconscious beginning and end of their Ti logic: namely, harmony and peace. If everyone thought clearly for themselves, they would each tap into Reason itself, like cogs meshing into a central wheel. Disharmony is the failure to access reason, and this occurs (as the Buddha taught) when one is distracted by the passion, fear, lust, pettiness, and ambition of their individual ego — i.e. of their Fi, and its activity through Te. "All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way…" This diaspora cannot result from reason, but from its rejection in favor of individual self-interest.

Reason represents the common source from which all things, by concupiscence (or unrestrained feeling), have fallen into darkness and loneliness. Adam Smith argued that an economic actor, "By pursuing his own interest, he frequently promotes that of the society more effectively than when he really intends to promote it. I have never known much good done by those who affected to trade for the public good." In other words, having the "right" intentions, or even the "best of" intentions, is accidental to success within a given system or game — a heart in the right place does not also rightly place the mind. It is only by reconnecting with pure reason (Ti) that the ultimate heaven of Fe can be reached (e.g. Kant's treatise To Perpetual Peace, or Locke's Letter Concerning Toleration).

And yet, for all this emphasis on logic and reasoning, the Thinker remains human, all-too-human. They too have feelings, intuitions, warm-blood, but they seek to clothe these in the seemly garments of rational justification. Yet (at least in human beings) thought is not the foundation of feeling; rather it is feelings cooled outer crust — its crystallization or petrification. Laws and legislation are codifications of underlying values; even Kant's categorical imperative presupposes a desire to avoid contradictions, i.e. a desire to remain sustainable. Thus, the Thinker is far from robotic: underneath their intricate carapace lies tender tissue. This is a fact the Thinker is liable to forget ignore, or even loath: that they are not motivated by reasons, but by feelings, which are the real molten bedrock of the world. They are not as strictly logical as they often like to think, not because they post hoc rationalize their actions, but because the very reasons which motivate them are infected with feeling; if it were not so, the Thinker would not defend their axioms with such irritation, anxiety, and evident self-interest. Descartes would not so trust his famed Cogito if he had no strong desire for a doubtless principle, and in accord with this desire, a release of endorphins did not crown its discovery. This is the problem of the criterion first raised by the pyrrhonists: that reason cannot justify itself. At the bottom of every deduction lies a personal feeling.

Such ideas leave the Thinker floating in a void; they are ungrounded, and subsequently prone to nihilism. If there cannot be a transcontextual position (i.e. a disembodied, unconditional state) from which claims to Truth can be justified, then nothing is justified, and, therefore, everything is justified — one might as well become a hedonistic brute. But this assumes Fi cannot also serve as legitimate justification, or that it never taps into anything beyond the limits of Ti. And perchance it is so; but the frightening choice remains for the Thinker, between trusting Fi, or descending into nihilism; between "an uncertain something," or "a certain nothing…to lie down on — and die." And can such a choice be made on the basis of reason alone?
INTPs are usually precocious children, synthetically logical and reserved. They may be solemn and independent, with a passion for asking why or seeking to find out why? all by themselves. They are obedient in matters to which they are indifferent, provided they think the rules are fair. They think physical punishment is violating to their dignity.
Hands-off parenting that allows constructive experimental behavior can be productive with INTPs. Ridicule and sarcasm concerning their abilities will be devastating and will promote their ready tendency for self doubt. Others may ridicule them for their ability to be lost in thought. They may use personal isolation as a defense mechanism. INTPs often feel they are very different from others until they find more commonality in a college setting.
INTPs may appear to be somewhat socially slow, needing to work hard to develop interpersonal skills. They are original thinkers, enjoying logical reasoning for its own sake. Having a passion for questions that being “What would happen if . . . ,” they are highly effective in organizing themselves to research and plan. As premier problem-solvers, any project, big or small, presents itself as a stimulating challenge. INTPs are sought after for their creative ideas and theories.
INTPs, as we can see, live in the creative world of concepts and ideas, placing greater value on the principles behind the facts than on the facts themselves. Even existence can be an abstract to INTPs. They have been known to pursue the impossible theory, the grand idea, to the disregard of reality or those closest to them. They make excellent writers, artists, computer programmers, scientists, professors, philosophers, and mathematicians. Because of their extremely competent cerebral abilities, INTPs are most often attracted to academic pursuits (INTPs are generally valedictorians, especially at the college level), and less to athletic activities, unless motivated by parents, siblings, peers and so forth.
INTPs are rare and complicated individuals indeed. Relating to them can be an intellectual challenge. If you can persuade INTPs to simplify their thought processes and slowly unweave their complicated conclusions so that you can follow their intricate logic, the trip will be quite worthwhile. They seek precision, you see, qualifying to the nth degree what they are expressing. INTPs with a handle on truth can be persuasive geniuses. As teachers, they need to take every care to talk on the student’s level. They make supportive parents, wanting children to develop their own abilities, preferring not to push or control. It’s estimated that INTPs approximate 1-2 percent of the American population.