The Introverted Sensation Type

The predominance of introverted sensation produces a definite type, which is characterized by certain peculiarities. It is an irrational type, because it is oriented amid the flux of events not by rational judgment but simply by what happens. Whereas the extraverted sensation type is guided by the intensity of objective influences, the introverted type is guided by the intensity of the subjective sensation excited by the objective stimulus. Obviously, therefore, no proportional relation exists between object and sensation, but one that is apparently quite unpredictable and arbitrary. What will make an impression and what will not can never be seen in advance, and from outside. Did there exist an aptitude for expression in any way proportional to the intensity of his sensations, the irrationality of this type would be extraordinarily striking. This is the case, for instance, when an individual is a creative artist. But since this is the exception, the introvert's characteristic difficulty in expressing himself also conceals his irrationality. On the contrary, he may be conspicuous for his calmness and passivity, or for his rational self-control. This peculiarity, which often leads a superficial judgment astray, is really due to his unrelatedness to objects. Normally the object is not consciously devalued in the least, but its stimulus is removed from it and immediately replaced by a subjective reaction no longer related to the reality of the object. This naturally has the same effect as devaluation. Such a type can easily make one question why one should exist at all, or why objects in general should have any justification for their existence since everything essential still goes on happening without them. This doubt may be justified in extreme cases, but not in the normal, since the objective stimulus is absolutely necessary to sensation and merely produces something different from what the external situation might lead one to expect.

Seen from the outside, it looks as though the effect of the object did not penetrate into the subject at all. This impression is correct inasmuch as a subjective content does, in fact, intervene from the unconscious and intercept the effect of the object. The intervention may be so abrupt that the individual appears to be shielding himself directly from all objective influences. In more serious cases, such a protective defence actually does exist. Even with only a slight increase in the power of the unconscious, the subjective component of sensation becomes so alive that it almost completely obscures the influence of the object. If the object is a person, he feels completely devalued, while the subject has an illusory conception of reality, which in pathological cases goes so far that he is no longer able to distinguish between the real object and the subjective perception. Although so vital a distinction reaches the vanishing point only in near-psychotic states, yet long before that the subjective perception can influence thought, feeling, and action to an excessive degree despite the fact that the object is clearly seen in all its reality. When its influence does succeed in penetrating into the subject because of its special intensity or because of its complete analogy with the unconscious image even the normal type will be compelled to act in accordance with the unconscious model. Such action has an illusory character unrelated to objective reality and is extremely disconcerting. It instantly reveals the reality alienating subjectivity of this type. But when the influence of the object does not break through completely, it is met with well-intentioned neutrality, disclosing little sympathy yet constantly striving to soothe and adjust. The too low is raised a little, the too high is lowered, enthusiasm is damped down, extravagance restrained, and anything out of the ordinary reduced to the right formula-all this in order to keep the influence of the object within the necessary bounds. In this way the type becomes a menace to his environment because his total innocuousness is not altogether above suspicion. In that case he easily becomes a victim of the aggressiveness and domineeringness of others. Such men allow themselves to be abused and then take their revenge on the most unsuitable occasions with redoubled obtuseness and stubbornness.

If no capacity for artistic expression is present, all impressions sink into the depths and hold consciousness under a spell, so that it becomes impossible to master their fascination by giving them conscious expression. In general, this type can organize his impressions only in archaic ways, because thinking and feeling are relatively unconscious and, if conscious at all, have at their disposal only the most necessary, banal, everyday means of expression. As conscious functions, they are wholly incapable of adequately reproducing his subjective perceptions. This type, therefore, is uncommonly inaccessible to objective understanding, and he usually fares no better in understanding himself.

Above all, his development alienates him from the reality of the object, leaving him at the mercy of his subjective perceptions, which orient his consciousness to an archaic reality, although his lack of comparative judgment keeps him wholly unconscious of this fact. Actually he lives in a mythological world, where men, animals, locomotives, houses, rivers, and mountains appear either as benevolent deities or as malevolent demons. That they appear thus to him never enters his head, though that is just the effect they have on his judgments and actions. He judges and acts as though he had such powers to deal with; but this begins to strike him only when he discovers that his sensations are totally different from reality. If he has any aptitude for objective reason, he will sense this difference as morbid; but if he remains faithful to his irrationality, and is ready to grant his sensations reality value, the objective world will appear a mere make-believe and a comedy. Only in extreme cases, however, is this dilemma reached. As a rule he re-signs himself to his isolation and the banality of the world, which he has unconsciously made archaic.

His unconscious is distinguished chiefly by the repression of intuition, which consequently acquires an extraverted and archaic character. Whereas true extraverted intuition is possessed of a singular resourcefulness, a "good nose" for objectively real possibilities, this archaicized intuition has an amazing flair for all the ambiguous, shadowy, sordid, dangerous possibilities lurking in the background. The real and conscious intentions of the object mean nothing to it; instead, it sniffs out every conceivable archaic motive underlying such an intention. It therefore has a dangerous and destructive quality that contrasts glaringly with the well-meaning innocuousness of the conscious attitude. So long as the individual does not hold too aloof from the object, his unconscious intuition has a salutary compensating effect on the rather fantastic and overcredulous attitude of consciousness. But as soon as the unconscious becomes antagonistic, the archaic intuitions come to the surface and exert their pernicious influence, forcing themselves on the individual and producing compulsive ideas of the most perverse kind. The result is usually a compulsion neurosis, in which the hysterical features are masked by symptoms of exhaustion.
If You Are the ISFJ: Caretaker
"Love is a goal worth sacrificing for."
You Are Someone Who:
Has a strong sense of duty.
Is usually concerned about the little people in life: kids, animals, the sick, and the elderly.
Believes in order: "A place for everything and everything in its place."
Finds happiness by serving practical human needs and taking care of your family: you can make a great nurse or teacher, as well as a terrific mom or dad.
If You Are Female, Your Best Matches Are:
ISFJs: Caretakers
ISTJs: Administrators
ESFJs: Dutiful Hosts
If You Are Male, Your Best Matches Are:
ISFJs: Caretakers
ISTJS: Administrators
If You Want to Win the Heart of Your Ideal Mate, Do the Following:
For ISFJs:
*Show as much caring, tenderness, and respect as you possibly can.
*Express your gentle, family side: talk about the kid brother you love or the eccentric uncle you adore.
*Woo your ISFJ with good, old-fashioned courtship; giving and receiving flowers and candy, taking long walks along the beach, and cuddling by the fireplace.
*Go slow with them, especially in the area of sex.
For ISTJs:
*Accent the traditional side of your personality--talk about how much you enjoy cooking, children, and providing for your family.
*Cater to your ISTJ's desire for timeliness, cleanliness and organization; be on time, neat, and clean when you're dating them.
*To really impress them, offer to help clean their home and make a date out of it.
*Don't engage in showy displays of affection and romantic gestures (bouquets of flowers not required); keep the conversation practical and the activities simple and cost-effective.
For ESFJs:
*Help your perfect host plan a party, wedding, or bar mitzvah.
*If you're planning the date, fill them in on the details and make sure you don't deviate from your schedule (unless you give them plenty of notice).
*Talk about everyday topics such as the latest trends in fashion, finances, or entertainment.
*If you invite your ESFJ over, make sure your home is neat, tidy, and aesthetically pleasing.
*Join your ESFJ on social outings to restaurants, nightclubs, comedy clubs, and anywhere else people are enjoying themselves.
This type represents the predominance of Si in a wholly universal temperament. Their most natural state of mind is the perception of what is "present" to them personally, in spite of what is objectively present. Si is a kind of "thoughtful" perception that sees what is really important, what is true and enduring in the storm of reality, what will really count when the chips are down. As in the fable of the ant and the grasshopper,
"Why bother about winter?" said the Grasshopper; "we have got plenty of food at present." But the Ant went on its way and continued its toil. When the winter came, the Grasshopper had no food, and found itself dying of hunger, while it saw the ants distributing every day corn and grain from the stores they had collected in the summer. Then the Grasshopper knew: It is best to prepare for the days of necessity.
The Conscience is further distinguished by their universalist judgement (Fe / Ti), which rejects immediate goals in pursuit of eternally valid reasons. As John Ruskin put it,
…no human actions were ever intended by the Maker of men to be guided by balances of expediency, but by balances of justice…No man knew, or can know, what will be the ultimate result to himself, or to others, of any given line of conduct. But every man may know, and most of us do know, what is a just and unjust act.
The Conscience keeps in remembrance traditions, customs, and common law: moral principles whose authority is derived from their impersonality. When they defend what is true, right and proper, they speak as messengers of something greater than themselves, as angels of the Absolute. And, depending on their circumstances, this can strike one as divinely humble or intolerably self-righteous. Either way, they stand in a room as a kind of conscience. Their very presence is vindicating or vindictive. Like a homely spider, they sit at the center of a sensitive web; when something exceeds the limit of propriety, the taut strands vibrate, and the Conscience must expend great effort to deny themselves the right of correction. This corrective urge becomes more intense in proportion to the degree of visible suffering on the part of an offended party. In such a dramatic case, the saying will swiftly be made true, that "whose shall offend one of these little ones…it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea."
The Conscience is generally a "conservative" force (temperamentally, not politically). They settle on a stable moral foundation that will only move at a glacier's pace. Their medicine is a mixture of reason and life experience, resulting in a brew of high ethics and personal "hang-ups," that can trigger equally intense reactions of disgust. Thus, we see both Se → Si and Fi → Fe. In the former case, the Conscience turns away from the faerie glamour of the present moment, and focuses on things of more eternal import. In the latter case, they forsake their own desires and emotions in light of the needs of others, sacrificing for the sake of the greater good. Such sacrifice is guided, regulated and codified by Ti, at the direct expense of Te.
The Conscience is not a consequentialist, but a purist and a Kantian. What matters is not quantitative results but qualitative vindication of principles, obedience to Providence instead of personal advantage. This becomes problematic when the Conscience is faced with a quandary unaccounted for by their orthodoxy; for, rather than adapt to the unforeseen context, they struggle against it with incommensurate methods; rather than change their methods in order to maintain results, they sacrifice results (Te) in order to preserve their sacred methods (Si). Thus, we have the infamous "Charge of the Light Brigade," where a cavalry unit in the Crimean War was mistakenly ordered on a death charge:
"Forward, the Light Brigade!"
Was there a man dismayed?
Not though the soldier knew
Someone had blundered.
Theirs not to make reply,
Theirs not to reason why,
Theirs but to do and die.
In what the monarch views as a gruesome paradox, the Conscience expresses their love precisely by forgoing their own inclinations and denying their own interests, in order to conform with a moral code. Furthermore, the Conscience is annoyed by those who consult no such moral code, and instead "live in the moment," consulting only their current context and desires. The Conscience protests that this is nothing but animal instinct, a wallowing in one's own ego. "Feelings?" asks the Sniper, "Look mate, you know who has a lot of feelings? Blokes who bludgeon their wife with a golf trophy. Professionals have standards." The Conscience is far more likely to value acting against one's inclinations, because this demonstrates the objectivity of one's principle's; they do not serve the biased subject, but are drawn from the world in spite of any subject living within it. As Joseph Pieper explained, "It is normal and essential, on this view, that the good should be difficult, and that the effort required in forcing oneself to perform some action become a yardstick of the moral good: the more difficult a thing, the higher it is in the order of goodness."
This proves dangerous insofar as truth is not really contingent on difficulty. Some truths really are, in themselves, personally advantageous. But when the Conscience focuses only on the duty, this can lead them to sanction tremendously immoral behavior. In the words of Nolan's Joker, "Nobody panics when things go 'according to plan,' even if the plan is horrifying." Granted that Fi types can have their hearts seduced, but Ti types can have their reason hacked. And then no natural affection can stand against their loyalty to pure "reason." as David Hume put it,
It is not contrary to reason to prefer the destruction of the whole world to the scratching of my finger. It is not contrary to reason for me to choose my total ruin, to prevent the least uneasiness of an Indian or person wholly unknown to me. It is as little contrary to reason to prefer even my own acknowledged lesser good to my greater, and have a more ardent affection for the former than the latter.
Ne / Si, as an axis, is more analytic than synthetic. Ne swings around and around the Si pole, reaffirming radius of its tether. Despite Ne's erratic and off-the-wall appearance, its connection with Si means it is ultimately conservative. Granted, it is an electron flashing throughout its probability cloud, but the cloud is contingent upon a nucleus, which anchors it down. The dominant Si type will occasionally venture into this realm of buzzing ideas, and return with some trinket of new inspiration, but this is all within a given circumference defined by Si. To more radically shift or burst the circle would require the engagement of the Conscience's Wakinyan: Ni.
The Conscience moves away from the self-certainty of Se / Ni, into the defensive uncertainty of Ne / Si. The Conscience respects the immensity of the multitudinous Nature in her million changing masks. Man becomes a tiny farmer in a Constable painting, with Si as his humble hut. He shrinks into a singularity in the expanding landscape. What Ni offers is expansion, out from the singularity — i.e. hubris: the willingness, the recklessness, the compulsion, to make oneself big against Nature, to search into its secrets, to consider oneself proportional to Nature, and worthy of one's own painting. To quote Pieper again, "man, of his very nature, reaches out beyond the sphere of the 'human,' touching on the order of pure spirits." It is only by such risks that progress is possible in human life: by the leap of faith into the unknown, into the uncircumscribed regions. Science's development owes just as much to slow, gradual progress within an established paradigm as to sudden Copernican revolutions, where an individual, pressed too hard and long against the tablet of the law, breaks the stone instead of their own bones.
The most important part of ISFJs is their awareness of the present moment and the absolutely literal way they experience life. Careful, cautious, and concerned about keeping things as they have become accustomed to, ISFJs are happiest when they know explicitly what is going to happen and what is expected of them. Gentle, considerate, and loving, ISFJs need close, nurturing relationships with the people they hold dear. Above all, they like life to be predictable, secure, and stable. They need to feel in control of themselves in order to open up and flourish. It is very possible your ISFJ child will become your best friend for life.

The examples that follow are drawn from stories of real children. But since not all people are unique, your ISFJ may not demonstrate all of the characteristics described or may not demonstrate them with the same degree of intensity. But if your child really is an ISFJ, most of what you read should sound strikingly familiar.

Preschool ISFJs
Birth to Age 4

ISFJ babies are usually gentle, quiet, and serious. They quickly and deeply attach to the familiar and are happiest with predictable and stable routines. They form very deep bonds to their mothers and fathers and are usually quietly content and peaceful infants. As babies, most are snuggle and are content to be swaddled and held close. They are typically self-contained and even-tempered when things are going the way they expect but can be upset and frightened by rapid or unexpected changes. They may be hesitant with strangers and are generally slow to warm up to people. But once they recognize and know you, they are very affectionate and loving children who want to hold hands, sit near you, and share secrets. They feel fierce love and loyalty to their friends and families and an overwhelming desire to keep those they love close.

ISFJs are generally very observant children. They especially notice and remember beautiful or pleasant details like a stunning color of a person's jewelry. They usually love fancy and decorative things and admire the people who have them. They can have remarkable memories for events they have experienced and can recall things they noticed months after the sighting.



About a year after four-year-old Angela visited a relative's home, her family was planning a return trip. When her mother told her the relative's name, Angela didn't immediately remember the person. So her mother began to describe some of the events of the visit—their back-yard swing, how Angela and her parents had shared the guest room while staying there, and how the relative had a white cat. Angela was quiet for a moment and then said brightly, "Oh! And they have a beautiful little blue bird!" Her mother knew they did not have a pet bird, but when they arrived at the relative's home, Angela took her mother by the hand, led her to the den, and pointed to a tiny blue ceramic bird on the bookcase.​


ISFJs tend to like to watch a situation first before joining in, especially if it's a new experience. Since they learn best from firsthand experience, they tend to be most comfortable repeating experiences as opposed to approaching new and untried ones.



Michelle and her mother were very close during Michelle's infancy and preschool years. They went everywhere together, and Michelle was easy to be with and content as long as her mom was nearby. When Michelle was about eighteen months old, her mother formed a play group with several other women with children Michelle's age. While Michelle was generally cautious about new experiences, she was more comfortable when the play dates were held at her home. After only a few play times, she was so at ease that she initiated the games even when they were at other children's homes.​


What is evident from an early age with most ISFJs is their strong need for routine and structure. If they know what is expected of them and how to comply with the rules, they will do so happily and take great delight in pleasing their parents. ISFJs love to do the right thing and be praised for being good. They want to be safe and keep others around them safe, so that even as young children, they tend to act as the protector and boss of their peers and siblings. It upsets and scares them to even consider going beyond the known boundaries, and they are frightened if others do. While they are very conscientious and caring, they will typically either try to reprimand the misbehaving child or, if that doesn't work, seek help from an adult.

Young ISFJ children are highly sensitive and gentle with others. Easily upset by aggressive or rude people, they often only need one unpleasant experience with another child or an overbearing adult to become very reticent about having any future contact with that person. ISFJs often have very clear opinions about what is proper treatment of others. They usually define it generally as "nice", and they are often unwilling or unable to compromise easily. They usually express their strong feelings freely and tend to cry easily, especially if they are afraid or worried. Not adventurous by nature, they often fear physical harm or injury. ISFJs need lots of close physical contact and loving words of encouragement and reassurance to calm them down and assure them that everything is all right.



Sean was mildly afraid of all insects, especially bees. But after he was stung at age three, he was nearly phobic about any flying insect. He would cry and scream if he saw a bee, and he needed his parents to remove or kill it immediately. Even after it was gone, it took quite a few minutes to calm him down and help him feel safe.​


Even as little children, ISFJs may have a high level of sensory discrimination and show definite preferences for certain fabrics, colors, tastes, textures, and smells. If they dislike something, their opposition to it is often very strong, and they may even panic if forced to try something they fear they won't like. They are very clear in their preferences about things that affect them personally—tastes, smells, textures—and find it almost impossible to compromise.

ISFJs generally enjoy small motor activities and play that involve their hands and fingers. They like to really explore and investigate their toys and can often play for long periods of time with a single toy. While they are usually happy to go places with their parents, they also need time to decompress, especially after their active days. Many ISFJs are great nappers and need a private and restful time each day.


Three-year-old Franklin's nap was a special time for him each afternoon. After a story and a few songs, he would happily get into his crib and spend the next several minutes singing quietly to himself or talking to his stuffed animals. His mother often stood in the hall outside and listened to him talk about his morning, describing in great detail what she had said to him and the things they had seen during their outings. While he might start out quite animated and expressive, usually after about ten or fifteen minutes he was sound asleep.​

Most ISFJs are very concerned about being clean and neat in their appearance. They are generally happiest when they aren't wearing nice clothes, and, since they don't usually like to get dirty, they may even panic if they spill something on their good clothes. And they usually want to get clean as quickly as possible. Many ISFJs love their baths are are delighted to play for long periods of time pouring water from cup to cup and enjoying the sensory stimulation of being in the water. Many enjoy swinging and rocking for long periods and may comfort themselves by rocking or rolling in their beds to help them settle into sleep. They often love to be read to and are happy to hear the same story over and over until they can "read" it from memory. Most ISFJs love music and like singing they many songs they have memorized.

The Joys and Challenges of Raising Preschool ISFJs

Perhaps the biggest joy or raising ISFJs is simply being loved by them. They care deeply and completely for their parents, siblings, and friends and are the most loyal and trusting of all children. They tend to listen carefully and fully and take whatever their parents say at face value and as absolute gospel. Generally obedient and polite children, ISFJs are eager to please the people they love and to get along with others. As long as their parents are very clear and explicit about what they want them to do, they will usually try very hard to oblige. ISFJs are typically contented and down-to-earth children who are delighted with the simple pleasures. But they are very literal and may become confused by vague directions and feel anxious when plans are left open for too long. They naturally like order and don't tend to be really flexible, so they want to know what's coming and what it will be like. They more they know in advance how an experience may be, the more willing they are to respond and participate in it.



Ivy's mother had to become very careful when she told her what they planned to do each day. If something came up unexpectedly, Ivy had a hard time accepting it. As with most children, this was especially true if the change meant she would not be able to do something she had been eagerly looking forward to. But for Ivy, even if the change meant swapping one fun experience for another—going to the playground closer to home rather than the one across town to save time—she would become angry and upset. "But you promised!" was her battle cry for years. On several occasions, she had temper tantrums because she just couldn't manage the adjustment.​


Because ISFJs are such gentle and sweet children, they are also sensitive to criticism and any kind of rough treatment. They need things to be patiently and gently explained to them, giving them plenty of time to absorb and process the information. This is especially true with new information. ISFJs typically need more acclimatization time than children of other types and may not feel comfortable trying something the first time it is introduced to them, nor are they comfortable venturing into social settings immediately, often preferring to hang back or watch from the security of their parents' laps. When they decide to put their toes in the water (literally and figuratively!), they might even want their parents to go with them to hold their hands and play beside them for a while. This process of getting ready and then getting involved takes longer than some parents are comfortable with. Parents of ISFJs may find themselves feeling either impatient or embarrassed with all the rituals and time needed to help their child break away from them and begin playing with other children. After all, it's going to be fun—what's the problem, right?


At a friend's birthday party, Benny's parents became rather annoyed with him when he wouldn't leave their side to play the party games. The birthday boy was good friends of Benny's from child care, but Benny kept resisting his parents' urging to join in, simply repeating, "I don't want to." The more they pressed him, the harder he resisted. His father, also an ISFJ, later remarked that the incident had made him really frustrated until he remembered that he acted the very same way when he was Benny's age. He remembered how painfully shy he had been as a child and how terrible he felt when his parents pressured him. He decided to stop adding his impatience and negative attitude to the situation. Only when he accepted Benny's need to wait until he felt ready, was he really able to support his son in the way Benny needed him to. And the less Benny's father pressed him, the more likely Benny was to join in.​

Pressure always creates resistance and usually at increased levels. Instead, focusing on the child's need, not on what other people might be thinking, is a helpful way to recognize your thinking and change your attitude. How much does it really matter in the scheme of things whether your child participates in the game of musical chairs or tries out the new playground slide? The subtle criticism and disappointment we communicate to our children are much more detrimental and corrosive than missing any particular activity. By standing by our child's side, we accept his natural desire to stay in control. Only when ISFJs feel safe and secure do they have the confidence and courage to experiment and explore.


School-aged ISFJs
Aged 5 to 1O

ISFJs usually love school, but they may feel apprehensive before they start. Fortunately, they are comforted by orientation programs and early visits before officially starting. These trips are especially important for ISFJs because it makes the experience real for them. By seeing the actual door they will use to enter, the classroom they will be in, the cubby in which they will store their things, they feel more prepared, and, therefore, more relaxed. Knowing ahead of time what they will be expected to do offers ISFJs a real sense of control over their environment. They also need to feel a personal connection with their teachers. But they can be a bit overwhelmed with the effusive efforts some adults make to get to know then; instead they prefer to warm more slowly.



Cara and her mother stopped by school a few days before the starting day to deliver some medical forms to the office. Cara's teacher was in the office and the time and invited them to come look at the classroom, where she had been busy decorating the bulletin boards. She let Cara take some time to look around the room and then invited her into the reading corner, where she talked with her privately for several minutes. The warmth and sincerity she showed Cara obviously meant a lot to Cara and her mother, for Cara was beaming when they left. As they walked out of the school, Cara told her mother the teacher had let her choose which classroom chore would be hers for the first week of school. She could hardly wait for the first day.​


Usually ISFJs enjoy activities that allow them to follow clear directions and that end with a result that they can be proud of. The more structure and specific information they have or the more likely they can practice a skill until they are confident of their ability, the more creative they will feel. Open-ended projects that offer an unlimited number of options are seldom as much fun for ISFJs as for children of other types. ISFJs are very realistic and practical and want to know specifically what they're supposed to do. Then they will labor over their projects, concentrating fully on completing them to meet the expressed expectations. School-aged ISFJs also enjoy playing with very small toys, Match Box cars, tiny plastic animals, or small dolls. They may enjoy weaving, stringing beads, doing puzzles, or completing activity books that resemble school work sheets. Because they are often highly aware of color, they usually like bright clothes, shiny objects, or sparkles on anything!



Six-year-old Olivia's favorite Christmas present was a sand-art kit. It came with both blank boards used to create your own design and preprinted designs with suggestions for which colors to place in each section. Olivia chose the preprinted card of a butterfly and spent lots of time carefully applying glue in one tiny spot at a time, then pouring the correct color sand into the spot. She worked slowing and diligently though the project. In the end, she was delighted and proud of her work, because by carefully following the design, she made a beautiful butterfly exactly like the one pictured on the box.​


Some ISFJs are avid collectors off objects such as sports cards, music boxes, sea shells, or a host of other things. They are usually careful with their possessions and like to keep them in order. They enjoy showing off their collections to people who show a genuine interest, and they like explaining all the details of each object.



Eight-year-old Colin had an impressive collection of baseball cards. He kept them in a plastic storage box and enjoyed sorting through them, organizing them into different piles. He could proudly tell you all the important facts and statistics of each player.




Richie was a real trivia lover. When he was four, he could recite all of the American Presidents in order. By the time he was ten, he devoured everything he could learn about the weather, watched the weather channel daily, and loved telling his parents the stats for the day, including temperature, barometric pressure, and the precise dew point!​


School-aged ISFJs are wonderful friends. They usually have one or two close friends, and they often remain connected to those early pals for many years. But they are usually most comfortable having one best friend at a time; they love the intimacy of a one-to-one relationship, sharing secrets, and making plans.

Most ISFJs are not comfortable being the center of attention and prefer to work as part of a team on a project. They often enjoy the activity and social responsibility of being a Brownie or a Scout, and they like the spirit they feel being on a sports team. Most school-aged ISFJs love the outdoors and being physical. Those who enjoy sports need to feel a sense of friendship among their teammates and with their coach to make the activity really enjoyable.



Nicholas loved playing soccer. While more than once he scored an important and even game-clinching goal, he really liked playing defense best. While he hated being the goalie because of the intense pressure and avoided the limelight of the more glamorous offensive positions, he shone as a solid defense player, conscientiously guarding the field close to his team's goal.​


ISFJs also tend to be great lovers of animals. They enjoy going to the zoo and learning about the habits of animals, but they are happiest when they can hold, pat, cuddle, or carry an animal around. They like both the idea and the reality of pet ownership and take their responsibilities very seriously. In general, most ISFJs like to help out around the house. Like many children, they sometimes need prompting to get going but are usually willing to do their chores without protest. ISFJs are often happiest helping someone else, standing side by side peeling carrots or pitching in to help a family member finish a project. They love family celebrations and holidays and enjoy all manner of preparations like baking holiday cookies, decorating the house, or shopping and wrapping gifts. Even as children, ISFJs are very traditional and usually want to maintain the same rituals and practices from year to year without the slightest change or alteration.

The Joys and Challenges of Raising School-Aged ISFJs

The tendency for ISFJs to be socially reserved usually continues through their elementary years. They are most comfortable talking with people they already know, and it can take them some time for them to come to trust you enough to really let you get to know them. While it varies for each child, most ISFJs are much more talkative at home than in public. Although they may not typically volunteer to answer a question in class, they will certainly respond if the teacher calls on them.



Molly, age eight, and her brother, Ethan, age nine, are both ISFJs. While on vacation with their family, they went into a small grocery store for supplies. Their mother, an Extrovert, struck up conversations with several people during the shopping trip, including the person behind her in line and the checkout clerk. Molly and Ethan just watched their mother in silence. On the way to the car, Molly said to her mother, "I can't believe you just started talking to those people!" Ethan added, with disbelief, "Yea! And you don't even know them!"​


Many ISFJs are so comfortable being alone, they may be content entertaining themselves for long periods of time. But given a choice, they would nearly always prefer to play with one close friend, rather than have a group of friends over to play or several different play dates in the same day. While they don't usually initiate social events, they are delighted to be invited and are usually eager to play. They often choose to befriend gentle children like themselves, but may also be attracted for more dramatic and flamboyant friends. Typically, they are more comfortable in the role of a follower rather than a leader. ISFJs rarely like being the focus of public attention, unless it is for a celebration like their birthday or recognition for an earned achievement. Even then, they are less embarrassed by smaller, quieter celebrations.

Change can be particularly hard for school-aged ISFJs. They can freeze up in unpredictable situations or when quick changes are required. Many even say that they actually hate change. Some ISFJs have such a high need for routine and structure, that they can be uncooperative and resistant when others around them are adapting and enjoying themselves.



When seven-year-old Caitlin's family had tickets to the Nutcracker ballet at Christmas time, they almost couldn't use them. When Caitlin learned the matinee performance was scheduled for 4:OO p.m., she asked her mother what would happen about their dinner, which they always ate at 6:OO p.m. At first her mother breezily replied that they'd figure something out. But when Caitlin became upset, her mother sat down with her and suggested they have a snack before they leave for the ballet and then go to a restaurant after the performance. Even with these appealing solutions, Caitlin was still reluctant. After she spent a few minutes alone in her room, Caitlin came out and said she had thought about it and decided her mother's plan would be just fine. Her mother complimented Caitlin on her mature attitude and offered to let her select the restaurant. ​


For some parents, the "high maintenance" aspects of raising an ISFJ can be frustrating or even exasperating. It requires patience and a commitment to help the child break the stressful situation down into manageable steps. Because ISFJs trust most those things they have already experienced, they are skeptical and even fearful of new situations, and they simply need time to adjust to new ideas. Providing them with lots of information about what the new experience will be like or how it is similar to familiar experiences is very helpful. Loving reminders of how they faced and succeeded with a past challenge are appreciated by ISFJs. And it is often the case, once they get started in the activity, that they enjoy themselves.

Parents of ISFJs who find themselves in this situation are usually more successful when they are careful to avoid criticism and not to communicate any impatience. The best way to help the child move through the anxiety and into the spirit of the occasion with with a gentle, supportive attitude. The ISFJ child may also need protection from other people's reactions to their hesitancy or rigidity. They need to feel sure that you are on their side, because the added sense of isolation and embarrassment only increases their panic and makes it even harder to be flexible.

ISFJs are characteristically sensitive, emotional children who tend to cry easily and get their feelings hurt by cruel remarks or selfish acts of others. Their feelings can be intense, and they are not easily able to hide or even control their reactions. When their feelings wash over them, they may rage, slam doors, or kick walls. They can even act vengefully when they are hurt by another person. Deeply upset by conflict around them, they may become depressed and frightened, especially if they fear something bad is happening to their parents or siblings. Usually, giving them time to discuss what is bothering them—in private—with someone they trust will alleviate their anxiety and fear.



Six-year-old Laurie's parents were getting a divorce. At school, Laurie seemed pretty okay, but her artwork expressed her fear and grief. In every one of her paintings, she made sad people with black tears streaming down their faces. Her mother and teacher asked her about her pictures, and at first Laurie only gave very brief, simple explanations like, "She's sad." But over the next few weeks, as she talked more openly about her feelings, her characters became bigger, and the black tears became less prevalent in her art.​


ISFJs may have an even harder time making adjustments or being flexible during times of personal upheaval. It's important to remember that they are the most adaptable when they feel important things are settled and unchangeable. Reminding them of all that is constant may help, but because any change, and especially painful or unwanted change, is so hard for this type of child, the process of living through the experience—surrounded by their parents' love—may be the best and only way for them to learn that they can handle it.

ISFJs may also struggle to understand hidden meanings and motives. They naturally pay attention to and remember the facts and details of stories or events, rather than what may be going on beneath the surface. They need help looking beyond the obvious to the possible. ISFJs are just not as aware of or interested in what might be as much as they are concerned with what is.



Terence was a good student and always finished his homework assignments ahead of time. But he just hated book reports. In second grade he had received all A's on his book reports, and he enjoyed doing them. But in third grade, several of the questions he had to answer involved why characters acted in certain ways, what the theme of the story was, or how one event related to another. He was often stymied and therefore frustrated by such questions. In exasperation, he complained to his father, "How am I supposed to know the answer? It never said anything about it in the book!" His father could see he needed help to elaborate the underlying issues of the story. Once they discussed it, Terence understood quickly what his father was talking about, but he rarely made those connections on his own. And he still maintained it wasn't fair to be held accountable for something that wasn't in the text! While parents shouldn't do their children's homework, it can really help to walk them through the steps of an assignment that requires them to use the lest developed parts of their personality.​


Interestingly, even at a young age, ISFJs are often concerned about appropriate gender identification. They tend to play in gender-specific ways and shun toys that are typically identified with the opposite sex. While they are nice to children of the opposite sex and are usually well liked by everyone because they are so gentle and kind, they are happiest playing in ways that confirm their gender. They like to practice what they think they will become: little girl ISFJs like putting on makeup, dressing up, and pretending they are fancy ladies; little boy ISFJs like playing with weapons and cars, and pretending they are strong men. It would never occur to them that it might be fun to play at being the opposite sex. They seem to be conventional children right from the start, talking early on about getting married, having children, and holding down traditional jobs. What is known is what is comfortable, and so it makes perfect sense to them! Their reaction to any discouragement of those choices and plans may be met with anger, since they just aren't ready to think about taking a different path or having an identity at odds with the models they see around them. It's just too scary and weird. This can be particularly hard for feminist parents who fear their children locking themselves in conventional roles. But with time and more experience, many growing ISFJs will learn to see other alternatives as plausible or even desirable.

As ISFJs grow older, they want increasing control over their lives and want to make even more of the decisions that affect them. They still want and need clear boundaries and explicit directions but seek the opportunity to be in charge of themselves within those parameters. As an ISFJ grows towards adolescence, he does not want to be over-managed by his parents. As long as he is confident that plans are set and a structure exists for him to work within, he may be surprisingly willing to take risks and strike out on his own.


Ten-year-old Billy took an airplane trip to Chicago alone to visit his best friend, Marc, who had recently moved there. He knew his parents and Marc's had made all the necessary arrangements. They explained that he would never be alone and that the flight attendant would wait with him at the airport until Marc and his parents picked him up. Billy never even asked about the contingency plans. Billy's mother was privately nervous about the trip but she kept it to herself because Billy was calm and confident. He handled it beautifully.​



Adolescent ISFJs
Age 11 to 16

For most ISFJs, the adolescent years are marked by increasing levels of responsibility and a growing sense of self-confidence. Their natural tendency to resist new experiences and to be hesitant to engage in group social situations begins to lesson. This is because as they get older, they have the benefit of many more—and different—experiences under their belts to refer to when facing a new challenge. Since ISFJs most trust that which they know to be true, the more they learn from firsthand experience the more their confidence about making the right choices grows.

Most teenaged ISFJs continue to take their school and home responsibilities very seriously. They typically like to do their homework as soon as they get home from school as well as finish their chores as soon as possible. Since they derive satisfaction from completing tasks, they rarely need to be reminded.


One snowy morning, school was canceled. While all the kids in the family were delighted about the day off, twelve-year-old Stuart told his mother that he was most glad because it gave him an extra day to get ready for his science test. He didn't spend the whole day with his nose in the book, but he did spend a couple of hours during the afternoon reviewing his notes, and rereading the chapters.​

Adolescent ISFJs can sometimes be forgetful, but that's usually when they are deeply involved in another activity and simply lose track of time. They pride themselves on being grown-up enough to handle responsibilities and prefer not to be reminded by their parents. Most ISFJs are remarkably organized and self-disciplined and feel that too much assistance from parents is unnecessary and even insulting.

With age also comes a growing interest in earning money. ISFJs usually like the entire process of working, saving, and then spending the money they earn. They tend to be careful with their money and deliberate in their purchases. Rarely do they impulsively blow their hard-earned money on something silly. Rather, they usually research their purchases well and make good choices that typically involve objects of good quality that are made to last.


Liam's new job was stacking firewood for his neighbor each week. He enjoyed earning the money and was excited about earning enough to buy the new mountain bike he had been admiring for some time. Whenever Liam felt less than enthusiatic about going to his neighbor's yard to stack the wood, he would look at the photograph of the prized bike in the catalog. He confided in his mother that he only had to take one look and he could almost feel the bike beneath him. That would help him find the energy to hop up and get busy.​

ISFJs generally like their personal space to be well ordered and tidy. They take good care of their possessions and like everything to be in its place. Periodically they may like to clear out the clutter in their lives, and in the process, reduce their already neat rooms to Spartan cells! They are as selective about what they collect as they are about which activities and which people they befriend. But all the things (and people) they surround themselves with are well loved and treated with respect.

Even as most other teenagers are spending every spare moment on the telephone, ISFJs remain rather reserved and may not initiate much social interaction. They are glad to be invited places and are usually eager to go, but they don't tend to call friends or be really chatty on the phone when friends call them. They tend to have a close circle of friends and are somewhat conservative in their choice of friends and sweethearts.

As in their early school years, ISFJs usually like to be dressed in nice clothes and be clean and well groomed. They tend to prefer more traditional and conventional clothes and rarely engage in radical behavior such as dying their hair green or piercing their bodies. But since their appearance does matter very much to them, if they are teased or critisized for wearing a particular item of clothing they may never wear it again. ISFJs often become more sensitive to the opinions of others as they get older, and they may be more willing to moderately adapt their style to fit in. They have a strong need to be accepted and liked and may be influenced to do things they might not ordinarily do just to achieve firm social fitting in a group. But even if they rebel against some of their previously conventional ways, it is usually not long before they return to a more traditional lifestyle.

It is not really in the nature of ISFJs to flout the rules or revolt against the establishment, since conventions are a source of great comfort and security to them. While it may be difficult for the parents of an ISFJ to go through the rebellious period, it is usually more stressful for the child. Parents who don't make too much of a big deal about this phase, accepting it as a natural and necessary part of their ISFJ's growth toward independent thinking and decision making, makes it easier for their ISFJ to return to a sense of balance. Resistance or hysterics just prolong the experiment.


Recapping What Works with ISFJs

Hold them frequently and for long periods of time.
Sing songs, read to them, rub their backs, and otherwise offer lots of close, loving play.
Respect their need to take time to acclimate to new surroundings and people; don't rush them or push them.
Maintain a familiar routine and explain in advance as much detail as possible about new experiences.
Speak softly and patiently with them; give specific directions and instructions.
Support their need to express their feelings in their own time and at their own pace.
When they feel hesitant and unsure of new things, remind them of the times in the past when they conquered their fears and enjoyed themselves.
Reward them with higher levels of responsibility; praise their efforts at self-control.
Respect their natural concern about security and safety.
Maintain fair and consistent rules.
Provide real-life models of people who have successfully created work or lifestlyes that aer different from the stereotypically male and female roles.
Communicate your confidence that they will become independent and self-sufficient, while assuring them that they can always count on your support.




The ISFJ in a Crystal Ball

Unconditional love is pretty easy to give to ISFJs—simply mimicking the way your ISFJ child loves you—with complete trust, full faith, and total loyalty. When ISFJs are accepted, they come to see themselves as the truly divine and lovable people they are. Lasting self-esteem for ISFJs is encouraged by parents who respet their gentle style and appreciate their love of simple things. By being careful listeners and patient teachers and guides, parents of ISFJs not only create a close, permanent bond with their children, but also reinforce their naturally accepting and loving tendencies. ISFJs who know without question that their need for stability and clarity is understood, even if it can't always be accommodated, and whose feelings and opinions are heard and supported, grow to trust their ability to step out into the world with confidence. By gently encouraging and helping ISFJs to try new things, parents can help them come to trust and count on themselves.

At their best, ISFJs are warm, giving, generous, and fully committed to the people and causes they believe in. They will work tirelessly to meet their goals and can inspire others by their sense of commitment and willingness to let their word be their bond. Secure adult ISFJs are dedicated, patient caregivers—in whatever profession they choose—and demonstrate amazing stability and courage in the face of crises. ISFJs can possess great common sense, inner discipline, and unshakable faith in their personal values. Those who have learned the skills of adapting, managing change, and speaking up for themselves can become the rudders of their communities and a source of strength and support for themselves and their families.
