The Introverted Feeling Type

It is principally among women that I have found the predominance of introverted feeling. "Still waters run deep" is very true of such women. They are mostly silent, inaccessible, hard to understand; often they hide behind a childish or banal mask, and their temperament is inclined to melancholy. They neither shine nor reveal themselves. As they are mainly guided by their subjective feelings, their true motives generally remain hidden. Their outward demeanour is harmonious, inconspicuous, giving an impression of pleasing repose, or of sympathetic response, with no desire to affect others, to impress, influence, or change them in any way. If this outward aspect is more pronounced, it arouses a suspicion of indifference and coldness, which may actually turn into a disregard for the comfort and well-being of others. One is distinctly aware then of the movement of feeling away from the object. With the normal type, however, this happens only when the influence of the object is too strong. The feeling of harmony, therefore, lasts only so long as the object goes its own moderate way and makes no attempt to cross the other's path. There is little effort to respond to the real emotions of the other person; they are more often damped down and rebuffed, or cooled off by a negative value judgment. Although there is a constant readiness for peaceful and harmonious co-existence, strangers are shown no touch of amiability, no gleam of responsive warmth, but are met with apparent indifference or a repelling coldness. Often they are made to feel entirely superfluous. Faced with anything that might carry her away or arouse enthusiasm, this type observes a benevolent though critical neutrality, coupled with a faint trace of superiority that soon takes the wind out of the sails of a sensitive person. Any stormy emotion, however, will be struck down with murderous coldness, unless it happens to catch the woman on her unconscious side-that is, unless it hits her feelings by arousing a primordial image. In that case she simply feels paralysed for the moment, and this in due course invariably produces an even more obstinate resistance which will hit the other person in his most vulnerable spot. As far as possible, the feeling relationship is kept to the safe middle path, all intemperate passions being resolutely tabooed. Expressions of feeling therefore remain niggardly, and the other person has a permanent sense of being undervalued once he becomes conscious of it. But this need not always be so, because very often he remains unconscious of the lack of feeling shown to him, in which case the unconscious demands of feeling will produce symptoms designed to compel attention.

Since this type appears rather cold and reserved, it might seem on a superficial view that such women have no feelings at all. But this would be quite wrong; the truth is, their feelings are intensive rather than extensive. They develop in depth. While an extensive feeling of sympathy can express itself in appropriate words and deeds, and thus quickly gets back to normal again, an intensive sympathy, being shut off from every means of expression, acquires a passionate depth that comprises a whole world of misery and simply gets benumbed. It may perhaps break out in some extravagant form and lead to an astounding act of an almost heroic character, quite unrelated either to the subject herself or to the object that provoked the outburst. To the outside world, or to the blind eyes of the extravert, this intensive sympathy looks like coldness, because usually it does nothing visible, and an extraverted consciousness is unable to believe in invisible forces. Such a misunderstanding is a common occurrence in the life of this type, and is used as a weighty argument against the possibility of any deeper feeling relation with the object. But the real object of this feeling is only dimly divined by the normal type herself. It may express itself in a secret religiosity anxiously guarded from profane eyes, or in intimate poetic forms that are kept equally well hidden, not without the secret ambition of displaying some kind of superiority over the other person by this means. Women often express a good deal of their feelings through their children, letting their passion flow secretly into them.

Although this tendency to overpower or coerce the other person with her secret feelings rarely plays a disturbing role in the normal type, and never leads to a serious attempt of this kind, some trace of it nevertheless seeps through into the personal effect they have on him, in the form of a domineering influence often difficult to define. It is sensed as a sort of stifling or oppressive feeling which holds everybody around her under a spell. It gives a woman of this type a mysterious power that may prove terribly fascinating to the extraverted man, for it touches his unconscious. This power comes from the deeply felt, unconscious images, but consciously she is apt to relate it to the ego, whereupon her influence becomes debased into a personal tyranny. Whenever the unconscious subject is identified with the ego, the mysterious power of intensive feeling turns into a banal and overweening desire to dominate, into vanity and despotic bossiness. This produces a type of woman notorious for her unscrupulous ambition and mischievous cruelty. It is a change, however, that leads to neurosis.

So long as the ego feels subordinate to the unconscious subject, and feeling is aware of something higher and mightier than the ego, the type is normal. Although the unconscious thinking is archaic, its reductive tendencies help to compensate the occasional fits of trying to exalt the ego into the subject. If this should nevertheless happen as a result of complete suppression of the counterbalancing subliminal processes, the unconscious thinking goes over into open opposition and gets projected. The egocentrized subject now comes to feel the power and importance of the devalued object. She begins consciously to feel "what other people think." Naturally, other people are thinking all sorts of mean things, scheming evil, contriving plots, secret intrigues, etc. In order to forestall them, she herself is obliged to start counter-intrigues, to suspect others and sound them out, and weave counterplots. Beset by rumours, she must make frantic efforts to get her own back and be top dog. Endless clandestine rivalries spring up, and in these embittered struggles she will shrink from no baseness or meanness, and will even prostitute her virtues in order to play the trump card. Such a state of affairs must end in exhaustion. The form of neurosis is neurasthenic rather than hysterical, often with severe physical complications, such as anaemia and its sequelae.
ISFP children are like puppies – warm, affectionate, and unconditionally loving. They tend to be very sensitive and emotional people who have deep feelings and passions. They are gentle but intensely loyal friends who, at their best, possess impressive interpersonal skills. They tend to mediate with quiet persuasion, calm, and grace. While ISFPs are typically quiet and hesitant with strangers, once they get to know you, they are usually very expressive and eager to please. They hold their personal relationships in high regard and will respond immediately to help or comfort a friend. They like to do little, thoughtful things and show you how much they care, like making a beautiful picture or writing a love note. They need plenty of attention, affection, love, and supportive guidance in their daily lives. They want the reassurance of a parent's physical touch and closeness and the security they feel when they are really understood.

ISFPs are highly tactile people. As young children, they often have special dolls, stuffed animals, or blankets that they never want to part with. Even as they get older, they always seem to have something in their hands. They usually love small, beautiful objects and will surround themselves with huge collections of meaningful things. Often highly discriminating about textures and colors, ISFPs prefer bright colors and soft or silky clothing. Many ISFPs have an excellent sense of aesthetics and well-developed artistic talents in drawing, painting, music, and dance. Most ISFPs adore animals and are content to sit and tenderly hold or pat one for a long time. They often enjoy sensory activities like cooking or mixing food coloring or other ingredients together just to see what will happen! ISFPs tend to be very excellent observers, noticing the tiniest detail. While they can sometimes get lost in the details of a project, they can tell amazingly factual and accurate stories.

Not usually the initiators of activity, they are happy to join in when invited but also need plenty of time along, among their special things, to calm and center themselves. They tend to be private people and aren't especially adventurous. Easygoing and fun to be with, most ISFPs struggle with organization and getting projects finished on time. They need lots of time to get themselves ready; for example, carefully brushing their teeth and hair may result in their having to rush to catch the bus. They don't like other people trying to boss or control them, but because they rarely plan ahead and don't especially like making decisions, they are often left submitting themselves to choices others have made for them. Happily, they are fairly adaptable and quick to forgive and forget.

[Source: Nurture by Nature: Understand Your Child's Personality Type – And Become a Better Parent by Barbara-Barron Tieger and Paul D. Tieger]
The "Artist" is peculiarly unsearchable and difficult to understand. They often have an aversion to being examined, to being pressed into a microscope slide for study, to being diced into bitesize nuggets the public can more easily digest. They are something beyond exchange-value: a magic grove, swathed in silence, filling the explorer with an ineffable sense of awe they cannot place. They are not so much a noun to be examined as a verb to be experienced. They carry something of the sublime in them: it cannot be translated any more than a great work of art. Feelings, yearnings, music, scenes, shadows, half-remembered dreams: their very being is contextual. It resists universalization. Nick Caraway watches, uncomprehending, as the tragic Jay Gatsby "stretched out his arms toward the dark water in a curious way…[towards] a single green light, minute and far away…" For, "[W]e know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered." So too, the Artist is often moved by what they can only call their "inherent nature": namely, the complex web of associations and heuristics they have constructed over a lifetime. There is no end to the frustration this can cause their more pragmatic companions, who are continually refused an easy foothold onto their motivations. It is said in the Middle Ages that the unicorn, brandishing a gory horn, would only lie tame for a pure maiden: the Artist can appear just as unaccountable to an outwards eye.

The Swashbuckler adapts desires to match present opportunities, but the Artist adapts present opportunities to their desires. Hence, the nickname, "Artist." Everything they do is, ideally, a pure expression of their inner nature, so that their very existence becomes a work of art. And what is beautiful about the art is not what it "says," but what it simply is. Insofar as they communicate anything, they communicate it through sensation, sound, image, taste, smell, mood, etc., for these are all contextual experiences for each individual audience member.

Their Te is primitive, and is expressed in an artistic perfectionism, and even in an unconscious need for control. The trouble is, they have a clearer image of what they want than of how to get it. So, when they want something, when they have an inner desire that wants outer expression, they have to mirror their inner realm exactly. They won't cut corners or compromise; that would be a kind of adultery or "selling out" to the outside world, and its laws of physics and economy. More importantly, they do not sell out to other people or to public opinion (Fe), to whether their dream is considered acceptable to others. They will make their dreams come true, and can see how to make them come true — but this is different from asking whether they can, realistically, make them true, or whether they even should pursue them. E.g., Michael Jackson spent millions converting a ranch into a private amusement park, "Neverland," infamous for its eccentricity, and, now, for its state of abandonment.

It almost goes without saying that such eccentricity is a side effect of their genius: they are a sealed petri dish, on which might safely grow medicines (or poisons) that would normally be choked out by the crowded, noisy world. They require a certain isolation in order to create. This is represented by their adversity to Ne. For them, Ne is the white noise of irrelevant opinions and perspectives. My father once told me of a batter on a middle school baseball team, who could consistently hit homeruns. The coaches were so impressed that they singled him out for advanced instruction; after all, if he was this good on his own, surely he would be even better with official training. But the result was quite the opposite: as soon as he began trying the coaches' methods, my father never saw him hit a homerun again. The point is that, from the Artist's point of view, an objective or external perspective is not necessarily the best perspective; for, there are an infinite number of wrong solutions to a problem. That is why this type is so suspicious of and reluctant to use other people's ideas; they trust their own heart (Fi) over the "war of tumult and opinions" offered by the world (Ne). Jordan Peterson offered an instructive example of this conflict for the Artist, and how Ne can prove so counterproductive for them:
I had one client who's a very brilliant artist. As long as he didn't think, he was fine. He'd go and create, and he was really good at being an artist. He has that personality that was continually creating, and quite brilliant, although he was self-denigrating…he sawed the branch off that he was sitting on, as soon as he started to think about what he was doing. He'd start to criticize what he was doing — the utility of it — even though it was self-evidently useful.
Ne antagonizes the Artist, because the Artist's calling is to Ni, i.e. self-assured prophecy. Ni seeks the answer, not a list of likely answers. In a dominant Ni type (like the Alchemist) the one true answer is found through a preceding Ne process, e.g. Aristotle listing various competing opinions on a topic, before curtly dismissing all but the "best" option for his purposes. But in the Artist, this Ne process is banished from their personality, leaving Ni unaccountable, whispering unvetted predictions in their ear. Their inner world can become too removed from reality, e.g. if the batter's original technique had eventually stopped hitting homeruns, yet the batter still refused his coach's advice. As Gary Kurtz noted about George Lucas,
I think one of the problems Lucas has now, in the LucasFilm empire, is the fact that he doesn't have more people around him who really challenge him.
…Film is always a collaborative effort. No film that I've ever made, when you sit down and see the finished film could we parcel out who did what. The cameraman contributes things, the writer, director, producer all contribute things, the actors contribute a lot.
There is another danger in this type's isolation: namely, their liability to mistranslate social cues. It is not that they do not hear the cues (they are aware of the Fe process leading to their Fi); rather, they overthink (or, better, "overfeel" them). They mismatch motives with mere symptoms; their "sympathetic parallelism" turns perpendicular. They are tempted to pass over more conventional interpretations; in favor of subtler, more complex and penetrating interpretations; e.g. "just because he is crying does not mean he is really in pain; he is just seeking attention, but he won't always be able to rely on me, etc." They are cleverer in regards to emotions than the situation practically calls for, because they mistrust outward signals of a person's inner experience. It is said that the Greek tyrant Phalaris, "imprisoned [his victims] in a brazen bull, and slowly tortured [them] over a steady fire; their cries could not reach the tyrant's ears so as to strike terror into his heart; when they reached his ears they sounded like sweet music."

For the Artist, Wakinyan wears the face of Ti, which is precisely the challenge to universalize themselves, to share their art. They must overcome their fear of being lost in translation. To some degree or other, the Artist must learn how to translate their work into 1s and 0s without losing the work's soul in the process. While it is tempting for them to declare this impossible, the truly hermetic lifestyle eventually leaves them unfulfilled. The challenge of Ti is not necessarily linguistic translation, but the willingness to make oneself accountable to society, to address them with universal principles, to play their games. Jung explained, "if [a work] consisted only in a poetic elaboration of purely personal experience, it would lack general validity and permanent value. It achieves both because it is not merely personal but is concerned with [one's] own experience of the collective problems of our time."
[HR][/HR] "You are the bows from which your children as living arrows are sent forth...
Let your bending in the archer's hand be for gladness;
For even as He loves the arrow that flies,
so He loves also the bow that is stable." -- Kahlil Gibran


ISFPs enjoy their parenting role, and take great pride and comfort in their children. Most have a special affinity with babies and young children, and form bonds with their children when they are very young. They are very laid-back parents, and are not likely to have highly defined expectations of their children. They will gently guide their behavior, and suggest a particular direction, but their own respect of the individual psyche will cause them to be quite easy-going and non-demanding as parents. The ISFP is likely to treat their children as individuals, and encourage them to have their own role in the family.

ISFPs love to have fun, and live in the current moment. All ISFPs have a bit of little kid inside themselves, and they love to play games alongside their children. They're special affinity towards nature and animals makes them likely to lead their children in fun outdoors activities.

ISFPs are not likely to provide a very structured environment for their children. They are also likely to have a problem with disciplining or punishing their kids. The gentle manner and kind heart of the ISFP makes it hard for them to make others unhappy - especially their own children. However, structure and discipline are important for growing children. If the other parent encourages and promotes structure, and is able to administer discipline when necessary, the parent combination may work very well without there being an obvious lack of structure. However, if the other parent is also not strong with structure or discipline, this is an area which needs to have special attention. Growing children do not have the experience to decide on their own the difference between Right and Wrong. They need to have barriers set down in a tangible way, to help them decide.

ISFPs like to show their love in deeds rather than words, which is manifested in their doing a lot for their children. They may lavish them with gifts on Christmas day, or go out of their way to do special things for them.

The ISFP is a service-oriented person, who defines their personal worth in some part by how happy they make others. This is typical of people with the Feeling preference. The special potential problem that ISFPs face is their service-oriented attitude combined with their habit of not expressing their own needs and feelings. This combination causes some ISFPs to get taken for granted. If this happens frequently to an ISFP, they may become bitter and angry. They think of themselves as victims, and may erect barriers to keep out those who have hurt them. This may be a serious problem if the ISFP parent feels that their children are taking them for granted. The best defense against such a situation occurring is for the ISFP to get into the habit of verbalizing and communicating their needs.

ISFP parents will be loyal, dedicated and self-sacrificing to their children until they leave home. When the kids have left the nest, the ISFP will enjoy their time alone to do things for themselves. If the ISFP has not allowed themselves to become victims or victimizers in their life, they will be very good parents, and will be remembered fondly and affectionately by their children.
