The Introverted Sensation Type
The predominance of introverted sensation produces a definite type, which is characterized by certain peculiarities. It is an irrational type, because it is oriented amid the flux of events not by rational judgment but simply by what happens. Whereas the extraverted sensation type is guided by the intensity of objective influences, the introverted type is guided by the intensity of the subjective sensation excited by the objective stimulus. Obviously, therefore, no proportional relation exists between object and sensation, but one that is apparently quite unpredictable and arbitrary. What will make an impression and what will not can never be seen in advance, and from outside. Did there exist an aptitude for expression in any way proportional to the intensity of his sensations, the irrationality of this type would be extraordinarily striking. This is the case, for instance, when an individual is a creative artist. But since this is the exception, the introvert's characteristic difficulty in expressing himself also conceals his irrationality. On the contrary, he may be conspicuous for his calmness and passivity, or for his rational self-control. This peculiarity, which often leads a superficial judgment astray, is really due to his unrelatedness to objects. Normally the object is not consciously devalued in the least, but its stimulus is removed from it and immediately replaced by a subjective reaction no longer related to the reality of the object. This naturally has the same effect as devaluation. Such a type can easily make one question why one should exist at all, or why objects in general should have any justification for their existence since everything essential still goes on happening without them. This doubt may be justified in extreme cases, but not in the normal, since the objective stimulus is absolutely necessary to sensation and merely produces something different from what the external situation might lead one to expect.
Seen from the outside, it looks as though the effect of the object did not penetrate into the subject at all. This impression is correct inasmuch as a subjective content does, in fact, intervene from the unconscious and intercept the effect of the object. The intervention may be so abrupt that the individual appears to be shielding himself directly from all objective influences. In more serious cases, such a protective defence actually does exist. Even with only a slight increase in the power of the unconscious, the subjective component of sensation becomes so alive that it almost completely obscures the influence of the object. If the object is a person, he feels completely devalued, while the subject has an illusory conception of reality, which in pathological cases goes so far that he is no longer able to distinguish between the real object and the subjective perception. Although so vital a distinction reaches the vanishing point only in near-psychotic states, yet long before that the subjective perception can influence thought, feeling, and action to an excessive degree despite the fact that the object is clearly seen in all its reality. When its influence does succeed in penetrating into the subject because of its special intensity or because of its complete analogy with the unconscious image even the normal type will be compelled to act in accordance with the unconscious model. Such action has an illusory character unrelated to objective reality and is extremely disconcerting. It instantly reveals the reality alienating subjectivity of this type. But when the influence of the object does not break through completely, it is met with well-intentioned neutrality, disclosing little sympathy yet constantly striving to soothe and adjust. The too low is raised a little, the too high is lowered, enthusiasm is damped down, extravagance restrained, and anything out of the ordinary reduced to the right formula-all this in order to keep the influence of the object within the necessary bounds. In this way the type becomes a menace to his environment because his total innocuousness is not altogether above suspicion. In that case he easily becomes a victim of the aggressiveness and domineeringness of others. Such men allow themselves to be abused and then take their revenge on the most unsuitable occasions with redoubled obtuseness and stubbornness.
If no capacity for artistic expression is present, all impressions sink into the depths and hold consciousness under a spell, so that it becomes impossible to master their fascination by giving them conscious expression. In general, this type can organize his impressions only in archaic ways, because thinking and feeling are relatively unconscious and, if conscious at all, have at their disposal only the most necessary, banal, everyday means of expression. As conscious functions, they are wholly incapable of adequately reproducing his subjective perceptions. This type, therefore, is uncommonly inaccessible to objective understanding, and he usually fares no better in understanding himself.
Above all, his development alienates him from the reality of the object, leaving him at the mercy of his subjective perceptions, which orient his consciousness to an archaic reality, although his lack of comparative judgment keeps him wholly unconscious of this fact. Actually he lives in a mythological world, where men, animals, locomotives, houses, rivers, and mountains appear either as benevolent deities or as malevolent demons. That they appear thus to him never enters his head, though that is just the effect they have on his judgments and actions. He judges and acts as though he had such powers to deal with; but this begins to strike him only when he discovers that his sensations are totally different from reality. If he has any aptitude for objective reason, he will sense this difference as morbid; but if he remains faithful to his irrationality, and is ready to grant his sensations reality value, the objective world will appear a mere make-believe and a comedy. Only in extreme cases, however, is this dilemma reached. As a rule he re-signs himself to his isolation and the banality of the world, which he has unconsciously made archaic.
His unconscious is distinguished chiefly by the repression of intuition, which consequently acquires an extraverted and archaic character. Whereas true extraverted intuition is possessed of a singular resourcefulness, a "good nose" for objectively real possibilities, this archaicized intuition has an amazing flair for all the ambiguous, shadowy, sordid, dangerous possibilities lurking in the background. The real and conscious intentions of the object mean nothing to it; instead, it sniffs out every conceivable archaic motive underlying such an intention. It therefore has a dangerous and destructive quality that contrasts glaringly with the well-meaning innocuousness of the conscious attitude. So long as the individual does not hold too aloof from the object, his unconscious intuition has a salutary compensating effect on the rather fantastic and overcredulous attitude of consciousness. But as soon as the unconscious becomes antagonistic, the archaic intuitions come to the surface and exert their pernicious influence, forcing themselves on the individual and producing compulsive ideas of the most perverse kind. The result is usually a compulsion neurosis, in which the hysterical features are masked by symptoms of exhaustion.
Hi everybody, I know there’s a ton of information on here about this topic, but I know it’s been helpful for me to read people’s individual advice, as it has helped me gain a greater understanding of how other people function, not just as a type, but as individuals. So, I went ahead and wrote a rather comprehensive guide about myself hoping that this would be useful for other types to learn more about how I function. I hope someone out there finds this as useful as I’ve found many posts on here. I don’t mean this to be a guide for dating and understanding all ISTJs, as much as I hope that it gives insight into understanding me, but I think I’m a pretty normal ISTJ, so some of this might be helpful as far as understanding the type as well.
Let’s start at the beginning. So you just met me—a nice, solid, average, somewhat nerdy ISTJ guy—and you’d like to get to know me better, but you’re not quite sure how I feel about you. Take it from me; if I keep finding time to talk to you and I seem at least a little bit happy when I interact with you, I like you. It’s really that simple. Don’t overthink me. I’m kind of like Bert from Mary Poppins; I talk to who I like, and like who I talk to. But don’t expect some sort of nervous excitement from me—I’m just not wired that way. Unless I’m absolutely head-over-heels in love with you and completely comfortable around you, I’m not likely to be bubbly and exuberant. So don’t assume that just because I’m not gushing with emotion, I’m not into you. Quick caveat here: I will also find time to talk to people whom I find to be interesting, fun, intelligent, or who just bring out a good side of me. I may not feel any romantic feelings towards you, just because I’m talking to you all the time. I might just find you interesting. Don’t lose heart though (pun intended), if I like you in an impersonal manner, you’ve got a great chance at making that into a deeper relationship if you want things to take that direction. So be encouraged—if I’m talking to you and seem to enjoy it at least a little bit, you’ve got more than a fighting chance. I don’t tend to fall in love with people quickly; it’s a process that will take some time. But the good news is once you’ve got me hooked, you don’t have to worry about me running off on you unless something really serious (think death) ends the relationship.
Anyway, so you’ve made first contact with me and I keep talking to you and seem to like you, but I’m just not making the move. And you’re sitting there thinking: “What the heck is up with this guy? What’s he waiting for?” Well, here’s what I’m thinking:
First of all, making the decision to begin a relationship is one of the most serious decisions I’m going to make. I put endless thought into all sorts of everyday decisions. I think and plan everything I do. I might spend days mentally deliberating the most trivial of issues. Now think about how much thoughtful introspection goes into beginning a romantic relationship with someone. Yeah, I’m crazy, I know. I’ll spend weeks debating the pros and cons of decisions of minor decisions, so it’s going to take me a very long time to decide whether I want a relationship with you or not. Chances are, I’m still thinking about it. Just a quick remark here: while I try to think rationally about decisions that might be emotionally driven for other people, this doesn’t mean that I don’t have feelings. I have them to abundance. I just tend to block them out when I’m making an important decision for the sake of retaining my objectivity. This is what makes me adept at making difficult decisions, but it also tends to make me look like an emotionless robot. I’m not though—I have incredibly strong feelings inside—I just choose not to allow those feelings to determine my course of action. I have a heart; I just tend to avoid using it to make my decisions. You might say I’m prudent to a fault. Also, if you feel like this approach towards deciding to deepen a relationship is decidedly unromantic, you’re probably correct (at least using the societal definition of romantic)—but feel comforted in that I won’t allow the relationship to deepen the unless I have very real feelings for you. I don’t make decisions with my heart, but my heart will inform my mind of my feelings, in which case I will choose to advance the relationship if there aren’t any other serious issues that I observe that would give me reason to doubt the wisdom of doing so (i.e. serious character flaws, a bad reputation, etc.). In summary then, I do have feelings. I don’t let feelings make my decisions. But I will take those feelings into account when I make my decision. All this takes a while. So be patient and don’t try to push me into things. If I truly like you, just keep being yourself—it’ll work out, don’t worry. Worrying’s my specialty, let me handle it for you...
And here’s the other thing there’s a good chance I’m thinking: I’m thinking about what you’re thinking! I’m not necessarily self-confident when it comes to relationships. Really, I’m confident in everything but relationships. It’s not that I have bad self-esteem; it’s just that I tend to be afraid of rejection and have absolutely no social perception and intuition. I almost guarantee I have idea how you feel about me unless you tell me. I may possibly (I’m rather doubtful about this) notice that you tend to be around me a lot, that you seem to be happy around me, that you make eye contact with me regularly, but even if I do notice it, I’m going to attribute it to any other reason but you liking me in a romantic manner. I’m worse at making decisions based solely off of intuition than Brandon Weeden is at playing quarterback. It’s not necessarily that I’m blind (I tend to observe everything); it’s just that I never presume, and never make my decisions (especially serious decisions) on non-factually based observation. I need the hard facts. Otherwise, it’ll be extremely difficult for me to feel confident enough that I’ve interpreted your hint to me that it’s okay to take the next step. I’m going to analyze every single action you make, but unless there’s some serious factual basis that I can use I’m not going to accept my analysis as an accurate portrayal of your feelings—in which case I will keep overanalyzing every single thing you do, wondering if you really like me or not. You may have made things extremely clear hinting, but I probably still have no idea and even if I do, I still doubt my intuition so much that it’d take an awful lot to make me feel confident enough to take action based on that intuition. Moral of the story—I never trust my intuition, so I don't pick up hints as well as some other people. So keep that in mind.
Alright, so you've sent that message but I'm still not making the move. You're getting impatient waiting for a terribly long time, and you’re getting frustrated because I’m not doing anything. Here’s what to do. First, if you’re pretty confident I like you, and I’m not making a move, set me up for an opportunity. Say something like “Hey, [ideally some common friends] and I are [doing a certain activity/going to a certain restaurant/etc.] at a [a specific date], I’d love it if you’d come along with us. Check your calendar!” Don’t make it look like a date and don’t put me in the position where I feel obligated to decide on the spot, just make it clear that you’re going to do something fun and you’d enjoy it if I came along. If you haven’t given me your number yet, give it to me now and tell me to shoot you a text when I know whether I’m open or not. This kills two birds with one stone—you’ve engaged me in a non-threatening and natural manner by giving me both a way out and time to decide, and you’ve laid the groundwork for deepening the relationship through one of my more comfortable means of communication. It’s often much easier for me to communicate via the written word than it is verbally (it’s not that I’m uncomfortable talking, it’s just that when it comes to emotions, it takes longer for me to get used to verbal expression). If an approach like this doesn’t work, another option would be to try and find some ulterior and innocent motive for obtaining my number. Then, text or email away about fun things or things you find interesting, and if I’m interested in you, I’ll keep things going. I’m a traditionalist, and it’s very important to me to feel like the initiator and the leader in a relationship, I’m just terrible at it and sometimes need a lot of encouragement. Try to avoid asking me out directly, but you have all sorts of leeway as long as I can still persuade myself I’m doing things the right way. After a while, I’ll make that move you were waiting for.
Also, just something to remember in regards to wooing me—I may seem icy, but that ice is often a lot thinner than you’d imagine, and often it’s most easily broken by means of more distant forms of communication that we’re more comfortable with. I plan everything and feel most comfortable communicating in ways that allow me plenty of time to plan what I have to say. Sometimes texting, emailing, chatting, etc., is the easiest way to break through to me. There’s a good chance though, that if you adopt this tactic, I’m going to ask you out for the first time via written communication, so keep that in mind. Also as something to remember—you may observe a disconnect between my emotional openness via written communication and when I’m physically in your presence. Don’t worry about that; I’m just growing more comfortable with you. Take my communication via the written word at face value. I mean exactly what I write, I just haven’t come to the point where I’m equally comfortable expressing my feelings through words. I might tell you I love you through text before I say the words. But I mean it all the same. And the verbal expression will come; it just takes time for me. In the meantime, keep focusing on making me feel comfortable.
Oh, and lastly, if I’m still not making a move, keep the group mutual activities thing up for a while. If you have to call in a few favors from friends to keep things from looking like a date, do it. If you want me to make a move, do whatever you can to make me feel comfortable with you, because that’s the only way that move is going to happen.
Okay, so let’s skip to the part where the relationship has begun.
A few things to remember when you’re dealing with me:
First, always be clear exactly as to what you need/want from the relationship and the situation. I know for a lot of you, this takes a lot of the romance out of doing things…it means so much more for someone to notice your needs and take action without you asking, right? Well, if that’s something you need from a relationship, I strongly encourage you to avoid dating me. I’ll do my best, but I’m horrible at sensing what you are feeling. If you don’t tell me outright, I very likely don't know what you’re thinking and have absolutely no idea how to help you. But here’s the key thing to remember: it’s not because I don’t care. That idea almost bears repeating. I do care. I really do. I just have the worst time in the world knowing what people are feeling unless they tell me, and I don’t normally do well when it comes to knowing how to help that person. If you’re having a problem and all you want me to do is just listen and be supportive, tell me—don’t expect me to just know. Say these words: “Dear, I’m going through a hard time right now with _____, but I just want you to listen and be supportive.” If you want a different response, or you want more than that, just add whatever you desire on to that request. I think you’ll find I will respond extremely well to a straight-forward approach like that. I love to help people and I love to be there for those I love, it’s just that I’m terrible at knowing what people want unless they tell me. So please, tell me the problem and tell me how to respond—not only will I come through for you every time, you’ll be amazed by the lengths I’ll go to in order to help you. I’m a duty-fulfiller for a reason, and I’ll go to the ends of the earth to fulfill a duty like that to someone I love. In summary, make it a top priority to always be clear exactly what you’re looking for in terms of emotional support, because otherwise I have no idea what to do. Trust me, I won’t take it the wrong way, and I won’t feel insulted because you’re stating the obvious to me. The unspoken need might seem obvious to you and everyone else, 9 times out of 10 I have no idea it even exists. And 99 times out of a 100, I don't know how to respond.
Second, remember and observe how I show my affection for people. It’s really not that complicated, or that hard to see once you know what to look for. I will show you that I love you by doing things like calling you when I told you I would, being on time when we meet, helping you with various tasks, and providing for you. I sometimes equate duty-fulfilling with love. I don’t tend to be emotionally effusive from a verbal standpoint—I tend to see that as a lesser and more superficial way of demonstrating my affection—and I value authenticity above all things. And because I value authenticity above all things, I generally display my affections through actions rather than words. Please try to remember this when you feel like I don’t seem to be as loving from a verbal standpoint as other men. It’s not that I don’t love you; it’s just that I dislike demonstrating my love for you in that manner. Also, this also goes both ways for me. Because I show my love to you through keeping my commitments to you, it’s very important to me that you keep your commitments to me. I tend to associate failure to complete a duty with a lack of true affection and I will feel hurt (I may not say anything, but I will be hurt nonetheless), if you knowingly and without good reason, fail to fulfill your commitments to me. If you don’t think you will be able to fulfill certain promises to me, avoid making them. If you say you are going to call or meet me somewhere at 10:00, do your absolute best to call me or meet me there at 10:00, even if that means setting an alarm on your watch to help you remember. It won’t bother me that you had to set an alarm to remember because that shows me that you cared enough to plan ahead to spend time with me. I plan everything out, and I take that Boy Scout mentality to another level when I’m in a romantic relationship by planning and thinking about everything—so nothing makes me feel better than to know that the person I love was doing the same.
Third, do your best to engage with me on topics that I’m interested in (be assured, I’ll reciprocate). This can be done in in all sorts of different ways, but it’s very important to me, not that you’re the most brilliant astrophysicist out there, but that you care enough me to be interested in my interests. Here’s the great thing though—I’m extremely forgiving if I can see that you’re trying to learn. You don’t have to know everything—in fact, I like it when you don’t because there’s nothing I love more than to explain things to you. I don’t think you’re stupid for asking questions, because I love answering them! It makes me feel great and reinforces me because I know two things are true then: (1) You care about me (because you care about my interests), and (2) You are authentic. I love authentic people so much more than I love smart people. You don’t have to be brilliant or “book-smart” to be with me, you just need to show that you value my interests enough to interest yourself in and learn about them. But if there’s one thing I can’t stress enough, it’s to avoid pretending to know something you really don’t. I might have no idea when it comes to feelings, but I can see pretentiousness a mile off and it repulses me to no end. The great thing to know though is that there is no faster way to my heart than to ask me questions—even stupid ones. I love to know that my opinion is valued and appreciated. Oh and on that note, if I take a long time to explain something to you, make sure you listen and don’t get distracted. I’m going to be forgiving because that’s my nature, but it’ll hurt me to know that you weren’t sufficiently interested in what I had to say to stay involved. So do your best to be attentive and I can assure you, I’ll be attentive to you when you have something to say (that’s pretty much what I’m best at). Anyway, basically if you want to win my heart, do two things: (1) Ask me questions, and (2) Be yourself.
Isn’t it nice how simple I am in what I’m looking for in a woman? And once you get me, I’m not letting you go. Ever.
I love you more than anything in this world, dear. I can’t wait to meet you.
The Veteran is the intersection of Conscience and Alchemist: their perception is receptive, and their judgement is projective. Thomas Hobbes describes the resulting psychology:
The cause of sense is the external body, or object, which presses the organ proper to each sense…which pressure, by the mediation of nerves, and other strings, and membranes of the body, continue inwards to the brain, and heart, [and] causes there a resistance, or counter-pressure, or endeavor of the heart to deliver itself, which endeavor [is] outward…
In this vibratory model of perception, we already see the difference between Conscience and Veteran: whereas the Conscience (as a democratic type) seeks to harmonize with these external vibrations, letting them fully inform the brain and heart, which then reply in turn, the Veteran (as an anarchic type), feels their innards to somehow be incommensurate with the outside world, so that harmonization, even if it were desirable, is not strictly possible. The world, as an object of perception, represents a continual impingement upon the Veteran, a great stumbling block set in the way of their Fi desires. Freud claimed "its propgramme is at loggerheads with the whole world…all the regulations of the universe run counter to it…the intention that man should be 'happy' is not included in the plan of 'Creation.'" Here, we also see the Veteran's difference from the Alchemist, who sees the world in terms of opportunities and assets, rather than obstacles and enemies. For, the Veteran does not project their own goals onto objects, nor take for granted those object's cooperation can be negotiated; rather, they see objects (and persons) as entities unto themselves, and therefore as fundamentally unpredictable, unreliable, untrustworthy. The attitude of the Maverick is thus flipped inside out: while the Maverick sees the outside world as predictable and themselves as unpredictable, the Veteran sees themselves as predictable and the world as unpredictable.
The world of the Veteran is inherently dangerous, and the word most antithetical to them is "naivete." One cannot rush into a situation, merely reacting to immediate stimuli; one must be cautious, and therefore patient, scrupulous, meticulous: the tortoise rather than the hare. The Veteran could be summarized thus: caution (Si) born of incommensurability (—Fe). Unlike the Conscience or the Alchemist, they feel themselves and their desires to be "out of whack" with how the world in fact is. E.g. the psychic model of Sigmund Freud, who posited the ego as the mediator between the amoral lusting of the id and the realities of the external world:
…in every human being their exist…two psychic forces (tendencies or systems), one of which forms the wish expressed by the dream, while the other exercises a censorship over this dream-wish, thereby enforcing on it a distortion.
…the ego is that part of the id which has been modified by the direct influence of the external world…the ego seems to bring the influence of the external world to bear upon the id and its tendencies, and endeavors to substitute the reality principle for the pleasure principle which reigns unrestrictedly in the id.
The world is neither interested in nor designed for the Veteran's felicity. They feel like a mouse hunting for cheese in a house determined to exterminate them. Accordingly, they must distinguish mozzarella from mousetraps, provolone from poison; they must keep before their mind what is currently absent but eternally present, and never be distracted by the glamour of the moment. "[Don't] get addicted to shiny," said Jeff Bezos, "because shiny doesn't last." Their vulnerability grants them incredulity; they pride themselves on not being fool or "taken for a sap." Through Si they are sensitive to surface disguises, and through Fi they have ample reason to test them, using Te to poke holes through the paper walls in their way. They carry a magic tuning fork that tests the integrity of building materials and the authenticity of jewels. What they are after is a thorough soundness. Eisenhower, upon assuming command of his army, wrote, "This is a long tough road we have to travel…Fake reputations, habits of glib and clever speech, and glittering surface performance are going to be discovered and kicked overboard."
But what distinguishes the false from the real here is nothing more than the objective results something produces in light of the Veteran's goals, that which actually, objectively, and reliably helps the Veteran toward Fi is considered real and sound, and is valued as such. They are not like the Thinker, aspiring beyond their body and its ego; the Veteran remains tied to the body and its wants, to their inspiring Fi, and are quite content to serve its chthonic temple. Their exploration of the universal is fundamentally strategic. Much of this is captured in the existentialism of Martin Heidegger, who says, "…the interpretation of time [is] the possible horizon for any understanding whatsoever of being." Time is the horizon because it governs the ultimate limits of human being itself: namely death. Death thus becomes the universally shared context of human being (or "Dasein"). "Dasein 'uses itself up.' In using itself up, Dasein uses itself — that is to say, its time. In using time, Dasein reckons with it…Reckoning with time is constitutive for being-in-the-world. "
This horizon of death demarcates for the Veteran a space of possible ways to be, before the horizon closes and the curtain drops. These possibilities are grasped by the Veterans primitive Ne, and often have for them a misty, distant or merely theoretical character. The ability of Si to see what is not currently present depends upon the ability of Ne to sniff out what is possibly present. The opposite of this is to sniff out what is actually implied (Ni), because for such a perception to be made, a context (i.e. a subject) must be introduced, from whose perspective certain possibilities are more actual than others. Thus, the Veteran's confrontation with Ni is similar to the Conscience's: both types are asked to experience themselves as "big," as proportional to the environment, and as having some right or privilege in regard to perceiving its Truth.
For the Veteran, this is really the problem of overcoming their existential anxiety. Primitive Ne can overwhelm the Veteran with options. Its fertility and its horror lie in not ruling possibilities put; and, because the Veteran is goal-oriented, to be oversaturated with possibilities is to be overwhelmed by the thought of everything going wrong with one's plans. Si defends against this via appeal to the "tried and true," but the existential anxiety remains beneath the surface, waiting for the moment of crisis in which to spring up.
Anxiety makes manifests in Dasein…the freedom of choosing itself and taking hold of itself. Anxiety brings Dasein [i.e., us] face to face with its Being-free for the authenticity of its Being [i.e. the fulfillment of the Fi goal]…
In anxiety one feels 'uncanny'…here "uncanniness" also means "not-being-at-home"…we flee in the face of the "nothing-at-home"; that is, we flee in the face of the uncanniness which lies in Dasein — in Dasein as thrown Being-in-the-world…This uncanniness pursues Dasein constantly, and is a threat to its everyday lostness in the "they"…
The Veteran's Wakinyan is this feeling "not at home." Home is where things are safe, where protection can be taken for granted, where things really can be relied upon. The Veteran, rather than only receiving light through their eyes, must try to generate their own light outwards onto the world. Ni involves a confidence that, somehow, the world is proportional to us, since we have roots in the nature of existence itself. The Veteran is often at odds with the Hierophant (Jung) because the Hierophant puts faith in the depths of their subject (Ni), claiming it can offer more than just ungrounded wishing: namely, a deeper set of roots upon which our existence really depends, and by which our decent and heirship to the world is affirmed.
Freud believed that the fundamental myth of the human being was the Oedipal myth. The Oedipal myth, from a broader perspective, is a failed hero story…Jung had a different idea. His idea was that, it wasn't the failed hero story that was the universal human myth: it was the successful hero story.
…Freud thought of religious phenomenon as part of an occult tide that would drown rationality…Jung thought, no, that's not the case. There's something profound and central to the hero myth. Jungian clinical work is essentially the awakening of the hero myth in the…patient.

