The Monk combines the impartial rationality of the Thinker with the reserved genius of the Artist. Like the Thinker, they search for the principles behind things, and, like the Artist, they zero in on a personal vision, undistracted by the rest of the world. The Monk cuts through blubber and fat, right down to the bone; this they take for their Truth: unadulterated, unmuddied, clean and pure. They share the mantra of Steve Jobs: "focus and simplicity." Jobs explained, "Simple can be harder than complex: you have to work hard to get your thinking clean to make it simple. But it's worth it in the end because once you get there, you can move mountains." In the wisdom of Miyamoto Musashi, "…when you freely beat one man, you beat any man in the world. The spirit of defeating a man is the same for ten million men. The strategist makes small things into big things, like building a great Buddha from a one-foot model." The Monk is characterized by their faith in a single, simple secret, a great underlying principle, the sacred word of power. When this word is known, all else follows: it is the rhythm of the universe. "Martha, Martha," said Jesus, "you are parted and ado about many things; but little is necessary, and one thing has Mary elected as the good part, which will not be taken away from her." Or, in the words of a poet,
From virtue's blissful paths away
The double-tongued are sure to stray;
Good is a forthright journey still,
And mazy paths but lead to ill.
The Monk obeys the principle (Ti) despite every distraction (Ne). They know their love, Tam Lim, and whether he appear as a newt, snake or lion, they will never let him go. Thus, on the one hand, they submit themselves to a principle that transcends their immediate context (e.g. the newt, snake or lion is really Tam Lin); but on the other hand, their submission to this principle is insulated from "fair-minded" alternatives (e.g. I will only and ever hold Tam Lin). Their goal is to be utterly dauntless: to walk on water in the storm, their focus never deviating from the Savior. They "ain't scared of nothing or nobody." Thus, when asked about death threats from rebels, Vladimir Putin replied,
One should never fear such threats. It's like with a dog, you know. A dog senses when somebody is afraid of it, and bites. The same applies here. If you become jittery, they will think they are stronger. Only one thing works in such circumstances — to go on the offensive. You must hit first, and hit so hard that your opponent will not rise to his feet.
Such dauntlessness is obtained through self-discipline, i.e. the embodiment of an unembodied Truth, the contextualization of a universal. "Teach your body strategy," said Miyamoto Musashi; "…through fighting with enemies you will gradually come to know the principle of the Way." It is not sufficient to formulate the law; one must enact it; but neither is it sufficient merely to act; one must have rules for action, in accord with Nature. This theocratic position of the Monk is anticipated in Kant's Critique of Judgement, where, "Judgement in general is the faculty of thinking the particular as contained under the universal," and therefore,
The problem…is to make a connected experience out of given perceptions of a nature containing at all events an infinite variety of empirical laws. The understanding is, no doubt, in possession a priori of universal laws of nature, without which nature could not be an object of experience, but it needs in addition a certain order of nature in its particular rules, which can only be empirically known and which are, as regards the understanding, contingent.
In other words, knowing the rules of chess ("universal laws of nature") is not a sufficient condition for winning at chess; one must also discern each particular metagame generated within each particular match ("particular rules"). It is a matter of intuiting the best application of the universal principle within a given context. It is a temporalizing of the atemporal, the living out of an archetype, a theocratic mystery, which cannot be solved linguistically, but has to be lived through contextually. As Musashi insisted, "Language does not extend to explaining the Way in detail, but it can be grasped intuitively…If you merely read this book you will not reach the Way of strategy. Absorb the things written in this book." Only broad strokes of the pen are suitable for recording Truth; the details must be found out on one's own. The principle shines like the moon behind a hilltop castle, showing the destination and general path, but not the potholes, the thorn bushes, the wolves along the way. Thus, Musashi advises, "you must train day and night in order to make quick decisions." Furthermore,
There is timing in everything…You must be able to discern this…From the outset you must know the applicable timing and the inapplicable timing, and from the large and small things and the fast and slow timings find the relevant timing…You win in battles…by knowing the enemies' timing and thus using a timing which the enemy does not expect.
The concept of "timing" is another point of intersection between the atemporal, universal principle and the temporal, contextual body. One must learn how to see, in real-time, the unseen scaffolding of reality; one must conform one's body to the unembodied principle. This is self-discipline. As Diogenes of Sinope is reported to have said, "Nothing in life…has any chance of success without self-discipline. With it, however, anything [is] possible. So why not choose to be happy by avoiding vain effort and focusing only on what nature demands, instead of making ourselves miserable with unnecessary exertion?" The very nickname "Monk" implies this idea of self-discipline: the ascetic vow, the bare cloister, meditation atop a pole. Ti lifts the contextual body onto a higher plane. But this leads to several complications related to their primitive feeling. Unlike the Diplomat or Hierophant, who try to mitigate their truths for the sake of their audience, the Monk serves their medicine sugar-free. They become primitive in their sense of Fe unity, so that, although their rationality is ultimately universal, they will sabotage this goal by openly offending their audience, fearlessly "telling it like it is," or "doing it like it is."

For instance, "It was [Diogenes'] habit to do everything in public…Caught regularly masturbating in public, he would say, 'If only rubbing my stomach could alleviate hunger pains so easily.' Many other such antics are ascribed to him, too many to recount individually." Fi → Fe represents an expansion in one's values from the personal to the impersonal (universal). When this motion is primitive, the natural warmth of Fe cools into utilitarian calculus. Then the Monk can become a tyrant, demanding stricter and stricter alignment with the Way, ignoring Fi differences in favor of Fe unity to a purportedly universal Ti Truth, cutting off the stepsisters' toe or heel to make the glass slipper fit.

The remedy for this is not Fe, but Fi. They must be reconciled with non-universalization of humankind — the dangerous, Kierkegaardian idea that righteousness is not reducible to alignment with transcontextual laws, but has an irreducible subjective component. This is simply to say, one size does not really fit all; the monastic existence is not suited for every individual; the secret word of power does not work on everyone. For such exceptions, one must learn instead to empathize with their situation, and this is only possible when the Monk can draw Fi parallels to their own life. And this, in turn, is only possible if the monk is willing to leave their monastery and their vows, if only for a time, and experience other modes of living, not merely as imperfect versions of the Monk's one principle, but as legitimate principles in themselves. The Monk must come to grips with the true meaning of pluralism. As Joseph Smith said, "If I esteem mankind to be in error, shall I bear them down? No! I will lift them up — and in his own way, if I cannot persuade him my way is better. I will ask no man to believe as I do."
1. Thinking

When describing extraverted thinking, I gave a brief characterization of introverted thinking, to which at this stage I must make further reference. Introverted thinking is primarily orientated by the subjective factor. At the least, this subjective factor is represented by a subjective feeling of direction, which, in the last resort, determines judgment. Occasionally, it is a more or less finished image, which to some extent, serves as a standard. This thinking may be conceived either with concrete or with abstract factors, but always at the decisive points it is orientated by subjective data. Hence, it does not lead from concrete experience back again into objective things, but always to the subjective content, External facts are not the aim and origin of this thinking, although the introvert would often like to make it so appear. It begins in the subject, and returns to the subject, although it may [p. 481] undertake the widest flights into the territory of the real and the actual. Hence, in the statement of new facts, its chief value is indirect, because new views rather than the perception of new facts are its main concern. It formulates questions and creates theories; it opens up prospects and yields insight, but in the presence of facts it exhibits a reserved demeanour. As illustrative examples they have their value, but they must not prevail. Facts are collected as evidence or examples for a theory, but never for their own sake. Should this latter ever occur, it is done only as a compliment to the extraverted style. For this kind of thinking facts are of secondary importance; what, apparently, is of absolutely paramount importance is the development and presentation of the subjective idea, that primordial symbolical image standing more or less darkly before the inner vision. Its aim, therefore, is never concerned with an intellectual reconstruction of concrete actuality, but with the shaping of that dim image into a resplendent idea. Its desire is to reach reality; its goal is to see how external facts fit into, and fulfil, the framework of the idea; its actual creative power is proved by the fact that this thinking can also create that idea which, though not present in the external facts, is yet the most suitable, abstract expression of them. Its task is accomplished when the idea it has fashioned seems to emerge so inevitably from the external facts that they actually prove its validity.

But just as little as it is given to extraverted thinking to wrest a really sound inductive idea from concrete facts or ever to create new ones, does it lie in the power of introverted thinking to translate its original image into an idea adequately adapted to the facts. For, as in the former case the purely empirical heaping together of facts paralyses thought and smothers their meaning, so in the latter case introverted thinking shows a dangerous tendency [p. 482] to coerce facts into the shape of its image, or by ignoring them altogether, to unfold its phantasy image in freedom. In such a case, it will be impossible for the presented idea to deny its origin from the dim archaic image. There will cling to it a certain mythological character that we are prone to interpret as 'originality', or in more pronounced cases' as mere whimsicality; since its archaic character is not transparent as such to specialists unfamiliar with mythological motives. The subjective force of conviction inherent in such an idea is usually very great; its power too is the more convincing, the less it is influenced by contact with outer facts. Although to the man who advocates the idea, it may well seem that his scanty store of facts were the actual ground and source of the truth and validity of his idea, yet such is not the case, for the idea derives its convincing power from its unconscious archetype, which, as such, has universal validity and everlasting truth. Its truth, however, is so universal and symbolic, that it must first enter into the recognized and recognizable knowledge of the time, before it can become a practical truth of any real value to life. What sort of a causality would it be, for instance, that never became perceptible in practical causes and practical results?

This thinking easily loses itself in the immense truth of the subjective factor. It creates theories for the sake of theories, apparently with a view to real or at least possible facts, yet always with a distinct tendency to go over from the world of ideas into mere imagery. Accordingly many intuitions of possibilities appear on the scene, none of which however achieve any reality, until finally images are produced which no longer express anything externally real, being 'merely' symbols of the simply unknowable. It is now merely a mystical thinking and quite as unfruitful as that empirical thinking whose sole operation is within the framework of objective facts. [p. 483]

Whereas the latter sinks to the level of a mere presentation of facts, the former evaporates into a representation of the unknowable, which is even beyond everything that could be expressed in an image. The presentation of facts has a certain incontestable truth, because the subjective factor is excluded and the facts speak for themselves. Similarly, the representing of the unknowable has also an immediate, subjective, and convincing power, because it is demonstrable from its own existence. The former says 'Est, ergo est' ('It is ; therefore it is') ; while the latter says 'Cogito, ergo cogito' (' I think ; therefore I think'). In the last analysis, introverted thinking arrives at the evidence of its own subjective being, while extraverted thinking is driven to the evidence of its complete identity with the objective fact. For, while the extravert really denies himself in his complete dispersion among objects, the introvert, by ridding himself of each and every content, has to content himself with his mere existence. In both cases the further development of life is crowded out of the domain of thought into the region of other psychic functions which had hitherto existed in relative unconsciousness. The extraordinary impoverishment of introverted thinking in relation to objective facts finds compensation in an abundance of unconscious facts. Whenever consciousness, wedded to the function of thought, confines itself within the smallest and emptiest circle possible -- though seeming to contain the plenitude of divinity -- unconscious phantasy becomes proportionately enriched by a multitude of archaically formed facts, a veritable pandemonium of magical and irrational factors, wearing the particular aspect that accords with the nature of that function which shall next relieve the thought-function as the representative of life. If this should be the intuitive function, the 'other side' will be viewed with the eyes of a Kubin or a Meyrink. If it is the feeling-function, [p. 484] there arise quite unheard of and fantastic feeling-relations, coupled with feeling-judgments of a quite contradictory and unintelligible character. If the sensation-function, then the senses discover some new and never-before-experienced possibility, both within and without the body. A closer investigation of such changes can easily demonstrate the reappearance of primitive psychology with all its characteristic features. Naturally, the thing experienced is not merely primitive but also symbolic; in fact, the older and more primeval it appears, the more does it represent the future truth: since everything ancient in our unconscious means the coming possibility.

Under ordinary circumstances, not even the transition to the 'other side' succeeds -- still less the redeeming journey through the unconscious. The passage across is chiefly prevented by conscious resistance to any subjection of the ego to the unconscious reality and to the determining reality of the unconscious object. The condition is a dissociation-in other words, a neurosis having the character of an inner wastage with increasing brain-exhaustion -- a psychoasthenia, in fact.

2. The Introverted Thinking Type

Just as Darwin might possibly represent the normal extraverted thinking type, so we might point to Kant as a counter-example of the normal introverted thinking type. The former speaks with facts; the latter appeals to the subjective factor. Darwin ranges over the wide fields of objective facts, while Kant restricts himself to a critique of knowledge in general. But suppose a Cuvier be contrasted with a Nietzsche: the antithesis becomes even sharper.

The introverted thinking type is characterized by a priority of the thinking I have just described. Like his [p. 485] extraverted parallel, he is decisively influenced by ideas; these, however, have their origin, not in the objective data but in the subjective foundation. Like the extravert, he too will follow his ideas, but in the reverse direction: inwardly not outwardly. Intensity is his aim, not extensity. In these fundamental characters he differs markedly, indeed quite unmistakably from his extraverted parallel. Like every introverted type, he is almost completely lacking in that which distinguishes his counter type, namely, the intensive relatedness to the object. In the case of a human object, the man has a distinct feeling that he matters only in a negative way, i.e., in milder instances he is merely conscious of being superfluous, but with a more extreme type he feels himself warded off as something definitely disturbing. This negative relation to the object-indifference, and even aversion-characterizes every introvert; it also makes a description of the introverted type in general extremely difficult. With him, everything tends to disappear and get concealed. His judgment appears cold, obstinate, arbitrary, and inconsiderate, simply because he is related less to the object than the subject. One can feel nothing in it that might possibly confer a higher value upon the object; it always seems to go beyond the object, leaving behind it a flavour of a certain subjective superiority. Courtesy, amiability, and friendliness may be present, but often with a particular quality suggesting a certain uneasiness, which betrays an ulterior aim, namely, the disarming of an opponent, who must at all costs be pacified and set at ease lest he prove a disturbing- element. In no sense, of course, is he an opponent, but, if at all sensitive, he will feel somewhat repelled, perhaps even depreciated. Invariably the object has to submit to a certain neglect; in worse cases it is even surrounded with quite unnecessary measures of precaution. Thus it happens that this type tends to [p. 486] disappear behind a cloud of misunderstanding, which only thickens the more he attempts to assume, by way of compensation and with the help of his inferior functions, a certain mask of urbanity, which often presents a most vivid contrast to his real nature. Although in the extension of his world of ideas he shrinks from no risk, however daring, and never even considers the possibility that such a world might also be dangerous, revolutionary, heretical, and wounding to feeling, he is none the less a prey to the liveliest anxiety, should it ever chance to become objectively real. That goes against the grain. When the time comes for him to transplant his ideas into the world, his is by no means the air of an anxious mother solicitous for her children's welfare; he merely exposes them, and is often extremely annoyed when they fail to thrive on their own account. The decided lack he usually displays in practical ability, and his aversion from any sort of re[accent]clame assist in this attitude. If to his eyes his product appears subjectively correct and true, it must also be so in practice, and others have simply got to bow to its truth. Hardly ever will he go out of his way to win anyone's appreciation of it, especially if it be anyone of influence. And, when he brings himself to do so, he is usually so extremely maladroit that he merely achieves the opposite of his purpose. In his own special province, there are usually awkward experiences with his colleagues, since he never knows how to win their favour; as a rule he only succeeds in showing them how entirely superfluous they are to him. In the pursuit of his ideas he is generally stubborn, head-strong, and quite unamenable to influence. His suggestibility to personal influences is in strange contrast to this. An object has only to be recognized as apparently innocuous for such a type to become extremely accessible to really inferior elements. They lay hold of him from the [p. 487] unconscious. He lets himself be brutalized and exploited in the most ignominious way, if only he can be left undisturbed in the pursuit of his ideas. He simply does not see when he is being plundered behind his back and wronged in practical ways: this is because his relation to the object is such a secondary matter that lie is left without a guide in the purely objective valuation of his product. In thinking out his problems to the utmost of his ability, he also complicates them, and constantly becomes entangled in every possible scruple. However clear to himself the inner structure of his thoughts may be, he is not in the least clear where and how they link up with the world of reality. Only with difficulty can he persuade himself to admit that what is clear to him may not be equally clear to everyone. His style is usually loaded and complicated by all sorts of accessories, qualifications, saving clauses, doubts, etc., which spring from his exacting scrupulousness. His work goes slowly and with difficulty. Either he is taciturn or he falls among people who cannot understand him; whereupon he proceeds to gather further proof of the unfathomable stupidity of man. If he should ever chance to be understood, he is credulously liable to overestimate. Ambitious women have only to understand how advantage may be taken of his uncritical attitude towards the object to make an easy prey of him; or he may develop into a misanthropic bachelor with a childlike heart. Then, too, his outward appearance is often gauche, as if he were painfully anxious to escape observation; or he may show a remarkable unconcern, an almost childlike naivete. In his own particular field of work he provokes violent contradiction, with which he has no notion how to deal, unless by chance he is seduced by his primitive affects into biting and fruitless polemics. By his wider circle he is counted inconsiderate and domineering. But the [p. 488] better one knows him, the more favourable one's judgment becomes, and his nearest friends are well aware how to value his intimacy. To people who judge him from afar he appears prickly, inaccessible, haughty; frequently he may even seem soured as a result of his anti-social prejudices. He has little influence as a personal teacher, since the mentality of his pupils is strange to him. Besides, teaching has, at bottom, little interest for him, except when it accidentally provides him with a theoretical problem. He is a poor teacher, because while teaching his thought is engaged with the actual material, and will not be satisfied with its mere presentation.

With the intensification of his type, his convictions become all the more rigid and unbending. Foreign influences are eliminated; he becomes more unsympathetic to his peripheral world, and therefore more dependent upon his intimates. His expression becomes more personal and inconsiderate and his ideas more profound, but they can no longer be adequately expressed in the material at hand. This lack is replaced by emotivity and susceptibility. The foreign influence, brusquely declined from without, reaches him from within, from the side of the unconscious, and he is obliged to collect evidence against it and against things in general which to outsiders seems quite superfluous. Through the subjectification of consciousness occasioned by his defective relationship to the object, what secretly concerns his own person now seems to him of chief importance. And he begins to confound his subjective truth with his own person. Not that he will attempt to press anyone personally with his convictions, but he will break out with venomous and personal retorts against every criticism, however just. Thus in every respect his isolation gradually increases. His originally fertilizing ideas become destructive, because poisoned by a kind of sediment of bitterness. His struggle against the influences emanating [p. 489] from the unconscious increases with his external isolation, until gradually this begins to cripple him. A still greater isolation must surely protect him from the unconscious influences, but as a rule this only takes him deeper into the conflict which is destroying him within.

The thinking of the introverted type is positive and synthetic in the development of those ideas which in ever increasing measure approach the eternal validity of the primordial images. But, when their connection with objective experience begins to fade, they become mythological and untrue for the present situation. Hence this thinking holds value only for its contemporaries, just so long as it also stands in visible and understandable connection with the known facts of the time. But, when thinking becomes mythological, its irrelevancy grows until finally it gets lost in itself. The relatively unconscious functions of feeling, intuition, and sensation, which counterbalance introverted thinking, are inferior in quality and have a primitive, extraverted character, to which all the troublesome objective influences this type is subject to must be ascribed. The various measures of self-defence, the curious protective obstacles with which such people are wont to surround themselves, are sufficiently familiar, and I may, therefore, spare myself a description of them. They all serve as a defence against 'magical' influences; a vague dread of the other sex also belongs to this category.
Hello ISTPs! In this interview, I got a chance to talk to Tara about what it's like to be an ISTP. This interview was super interesting because you rarely get a chance to talk to an officially typed ISTP female. This interview was interesting as Tara explained her trouble with guessing what's coming next in the future. Because she is Se lead, she wanted to get the information now, in the present and making a guess about the future stressed her out. She also liked talking about people a lot and she has the fear of tribe hate. Over the years, she has practiced working on her Fe and make sure she mirrors the emotions of people she's speaking to and repeat back what they say to her. This has humanized her more to the eyes of her clients, friends, and family members. Because of the work, she put in her Fe, it's now odd that her biggest struggle might actually be using her Introverted Intuition to make future predictions. Overall, it was a fun interview as we talked about fitness and also using her SF Play to make amusing imitating gestures of her. Watch this video here:
ISTPs sit at a strange and distinct intersection of traits—one that leaves relationships with ISTPs feeling like an absolute nightmare for the average law-abiding, rule-following citizen (you know, the kind who has any sense of obligation whatsoever). Take a look at the 16 personalities encompassed by the Myers-Briggs, any you’ll notice that just about every other personality cluster possesses some tendency that keeps them grounded in reality. Js love rules and schedules, both of which keep them consistent. Es and Fs have strong senses of connection to others, which keeps them aware of the world and their place within it. Even Ns, with their aptitude for big-picture thinking, are likely to spend a fair amount of time in their heads before taking action.

ISTPs move through the world absolutely untethered to any of these things—and it shows.

An ISTP’s most defining characteristic is their individualism. It’s not that ISTPs think they’re special or different from everyone else—and it’s not that they’re particularly determined to be self-sufficient, either. An ISTP’s worldview simply make its hard for them to see what anything or anyone else has to do with them. They view themselves as separate, preferring to permanently fly under the radar. It’s hard for ISTPs to imagine anyone caring what they have to say—much less paying attention to what they’re doing—and they honestly prefer it that way. It sure beats the crushing sense of accountability that comes from responsibility! Or at least, that’s how ISTPs see it.

While most other types desire power (or at least, attention) from others, ISTPs thrive on avoiding these dynamics altogether, keeping themselves free from obligation and plans. If there’s a disagreement in your friend group, you can find the ISTP artfully avoiding any part in it, hiding in the kitchen and remaining on good terms with everyone involved. In groups, the ISTP is never the one volunteering to lead—the most engaged they typically get is offering a generally spot-on suggestion from the back and then not bothering to see if anyone heard them.

The ISTP’s unique detachment can be explained pretty succinctly using the four letters that make up the type.

The I(ntroversion) and T(hinking) predispositions keep the ISTP from thinking in terms of emotional interdependence. And the P(ercieving) element leaves them far more likely to fly by the seat of their pants than make any plans. All of these leave the ISTP pretty ill-equipped to relate to others—which naturally makes ISTP relationships a bit of a challenge. Then, there’s that S. People with S(ensing) tendencies love details and figuring out the intricacies that the average (i)N(tuition)-prone person blows past. When combined with the ISTP’s other letters, this S adds up to a grand obsession with the miniscule. A passing stranger’s facial expression, a single sentence or even an unusual sound can occupy an ISTP’s brain long after most would move on.

An ISTP’s pathological avoidance of commitment and conflict can make them hard to understand, but once you’re in with an ISTP, you’ll have the honor of being one of the few things they consider to be permanent. So, how do you pull it off?

Be consistent, but don’t expect your ISTP to be.

That killer S-P combo makes the ISTP intensely aware of the impermanence of life. One of the first profiles I read about the Myers Briggs describes an ISTP‘s reality as “being constantly torn apart and reconstructed in front of them.” They pretty much expect that their thoughts, feelings and perspectives could change at any moment and assume the rest of the world is the same way. This makes it hard for an ISTP—not only in terms of committing to others, but also in their expectations of others’ commitments to them.

It can be a challenge for an ISTP to believe anyone’s attitude toward them will remain consistent from day to day; ISTPs are some of the most likely types to continually check in with their loved ones to get assurance the relationship is still in good standing. ISTPs have a looser grasp on parts of the world that most people take as absolutes, and they assume others apply the same object impermanence to them. When you’re in a relationship with an ISTP, it can seem taxing to feel like you have to continually prove you still care about them, but if you put in extra affirmations at the beginning, it’ll make it easier for the ISTP to accept you’re sticking around. A thoughtful compliment, good morning text, a small gift or even a little physical touch can help the ISTP believe your feelings for them haven’t changed overnight like they fear.

The other side of this impermanence coin is that ISTPs believe that they, too, could literally change at any moment. Because of their loose grip on permanence and tendency toward improvisation, ISTPs are very sensitive to their upcoming options and alternate futures. Even if almost none of these imagined options come to fruition, ISTPs are plagued by all the “coulds” in their life, and this makes it hard for them to commit to ever being, doing or feeling the same things tomorrow that they did today. This can seem absolutely insane to more grounded types who have an easier time applying past experience to the future and just understanding that life usually doesn’t change that much, but for ISTPs, imagined future possibles feel impossible to ignore.

Because of this, ISTPs can be extremely hesitant to lock in future plans.

But the secret is: Almost always, life will be much more predictable than the ISTP will admit, and you can usually count on them to show up/continue to feel the same way about you. Just don’t press them too far in the future. ISTPs want the freedom to be spontaneous, even if they don’t actually plan on it.

If you want your ISTP to come to something, take a second to explain why.

Some of you might have already guessed this from all of the previous descriptions, but ISTPs aren’t especially prone to feeling obligated to anyone or anything else. For some people, that might code as “selfish.” You’re not exactly wrong, but you’re not exactly right, either. ISTPs just don’t innately feel like they have to do a lot of things that others do. They’re not trying to be inconsiderate or self-centered when they opt out of events everyone else is going to—they just think a lot of obligations are kind of bullshit. The ISTP’s combo of individuality, emotional detachment and noncommittal nature means that they are one of the least likely types to succumb to guilt tactics.

You’ll never get an ISTP to do something “because they should” (I’m looking at you, every single J type). ISTPs aren’t overly concerned with their social capital and tend to think they exist under the radar. Coming to your coworker’s cousin Kevin’s apartment-warming party just because Kevin might notice they’re there and think better of them isn’t really much of a motivator. ISTPs are more likely than most to opt out of big events, not just because they’re introverted, but because they doubt anyone will actually notice or care if they don’t show. This is important to take into account if you actually need an ISTP to come to something with or for you.

Don’t bother assuming they’ll come because everyone else is going, and don’t bother trying to make them feel bad, either. The surest approach is just to explain that it would mean a lot to you, personally, if they were there. Although they can be pretty detached, ISTPs tend to live in a “do no wrong” mentality, and they certainly won’t do something if they know it’ll be hurtful to someone close to them.

Don’t expect your ISTP to weigh in on things (but listen when they do).

It can be almost supernaturally hard to get an ISTP to be clear and tell you what they really want. This is because, as we’ve already discussed, they don’t really want to decide what they want until the absolute last second just in case anything changes on them. For this same reason, needing an ISTP to decide on anything at all is a special kind of hell—if you give them three months to decide on something they will decide one day after the deadline (ISTPs have decided that deadlines, like obligations, are mostly made up and don’t apply to them).

This can be absolutely torturous to anyone who prefers to have a plan, or any sort of structure at all, and this is why I recommend limiting the amount of decisions you put in front of ISTPs. If it’s about anything relatively inconsequential, like picking a place for dinner or a show to watch, chances are all they want is for you to make the decision. Most ISTPs don’t like taking the lead because A) Chances are they don’t actually care that much, and B) They don’t put a lot of confidence in their choices anyway. The best choice for an ISTP is the one most easily changed. Their worst-case scenario is putting their foot down on something and having it turn out badly, like choosing an Italian restaurant and finding out you actually wanted Chinese, or that the place they chose ended up giving you food poisoning, or a hundred other outcomes they don’t want pinned on them.

For this exact reason, it’s critical to listen whenever an ISTP does voice an opinion or desire. For most ISTPs, at least at first, this will almost always come as a very quiet suggestion in a tone so neutral it mimics indifference, and the ISTP would rather die than repeat it. A lot of ISTPs have a frail sense of their power to impact others and don’t go around expecting people to do what they want, so listening when they take a chance at showing you their wants (even over the smallest things) will mean the world and help them learn that speaking their mind isn’t just a disaster waiting to happen.

Help your conflict-avoidant ISTP be clear about what they need and how they feel.

You can bet this same fragility, or aversion, to definitive statements will be a challenge if an argument arises. ISTPs keep a lot of their opinions and choices close to the vest so they can edit them at a moment’s notice to avoid confrontation. This almost X-Men-like ability to shape-shift can be maddening for a partner that genuinely wants to make sure an ISTP is happy and satisfied.

ISTPs often don’t feel comfortable standing their ground because they find it hard to care about anything for longer than a second and certainly don’t see the benefits of defeating anyone else in an argument. While this level of non-confrontation might get them by in most interactions, it doesn’t translate well to a romantic relationship, where ideally their opinions and desires are 50 percent of the thing.

A lot of ISTPs won’t bother to correct your behavior if it’s hurting them, because they hate conflict and have a hard time believing they can effect change. If they try to subtly bring up problems they have, be sure to listen, but truthfully, you might just have no idea what’s wrong for an absurdly long time. The best thing you can do in this situation, other than summon a heaping dose of patience, is try reframing the conflict to your ISTP so they understand they’re not the only one they’re affecting when they don’t speak up. ISTPs tend to assume staying mum is the best way to get through life, but if you make it clear that hiding their feelings is hurtful to you, it might help motivate them to be clearer in their communication.

As frustratingly flighty as ISTPs can be, they’ll at least ensure you never have another dull moment. Being close to an ISTP means you’ll be privy to all the little things they notice but never voice to others, and because they take conflict so seriously, they’re not likely to trap you in fights about anything trivial. Their attention to detail means they can find something good or interesting about anyone they encounter, and the perspective can be refreshing to be around. ISTPs can be hard to lock down, but it’s well worth the effort to have one in your life.
“ISTP” is one of sixteen personality types. While some estimates suggest ISTPs comprise only 5% of the general population, my research and experience suggests this type to be more common, perhaps even as high as 8%. Male ISTPs are thought to outnumber ISTP females at a clip of three to one.

Like the INTP, the ISTP’s dominant function is Introverted Thinking (Ti), which can be associated with high levels of focus, self-discipline, intentionality, independence, and intensity of thought. ISTPs take life rather seriously and use their inner logic to discern the best ways of navigating it. They may, for instance, use Ti to work out their own personal methods for maximizing performance in a particular sport. They love using their Ti to solve practical problems or to optimize functioning. Because of their independence, self-directedness, and competitiveness, ISTPs may excel at nearly anything they set their mind to.

Because ISTPs’ Thinking is introverted in its direction (Ti), it often goes unnoticed by outsiders. What others tend to see is ISTPs’ engaging in action (Se) or mixing with people (Fe). ISTPs’ Extraverted Feeling (Fe) can bring a surprising amount of affability and personableness to their outward presentation. ISTPs often present as sincere, genuine, and approachable. Their Fe confers a certain childlike innocence that others may find refreshing.

Since neither Ti nor Se is a highly verbal function, ISTPs can be persons of few words. Their relationships are often built around shared interests or activities rather than extensive conversation. But since status and reputation are important to their Se and Fe, ISTPs may be far more talkative at work or in public settings than they are at home. In public, they may be fun and outgoing. In private, they may seem more aloof or disengaged, sensing that their intimates cannot provide them the same degree of ego boost they find in the public arena (Fe). This ostensible disparity between their private and public persona may lead their intimates to consider them narcissistic or hypocritical.

ISTPs commonly display conventional, sometimes stylish, forms of dress. While their Ti is concerned with functionality and practicality, their Se and Fe are attuned to the trendy and popular. Physically, ISTPs may have either a lanky or muscular build. While athletic engagement often keeps them fit throughout their childhood, their love for food (Se) may lead to problems with weight in adulthood.

While not to the same extent as their ESTP counterparts, ISTPs are undeterred from investing in high quality and/or high-status goods. Like other Se types, they can appreciate excellent food (some are even foodies) and stylish clothing. Fancy or vintage sports cars, motorcycles, or power tools commonly line the garages of ISTPs.

Like other SP types, ISTPs often display great kinesthetic intelligence. They are often mechanically-inclined and endowed with excellent hand-eye coordination. In contrast to INTPs, who sport high levels of mental energy, ISTPs may exhibit higher levels of physical energy and stamina. While INTPs use their Ne to explore ideas, the ISTP and ISFP prefer using their hands, body, and other senses to explore and manipulate the concrete world (Se).

Because of their preference for hands-on activities, ISTPs may underperform in academic settings. This is typically not due to a lack of ability per se, but a lack of interest or stimulation. As is true for all Sensing types, being forced to deal in abstractions for too long can be draining for ISTPs. Their need for physical activity and impatience with abstractions may also explain why ISTP school children are more likely to be diagnosed with ADD or ADHD than some of the other personality types. ISTP students who can set their focus on a particular career goal or endpoint, such as becoming a surgeon, are apt to fare better.

Generally speaking, ISTP career-seekers are wise to pursue careers that allow them to use their practical intelligence to solve concrete problems (i.e., Holland “Realistic” careers). They can make excellent artisans, athletes, mechanics, drummers, maintenance workers, chiropractors, surgeons, pilots, chefs, etc.

While ISTP differ from ISTJs by only one “preference” (i.e., J-P), these types actually share zero functions in common. This makes them far more different than is sometimes recognized. As TJ types, ISTJs are more direct and firm (even blunt) in their assertions than ISTPs are. ISTPs use Fe rather than Te, which confers a certain social ease, even charm, which ISTJs often lack. Moreover, ISTPs use Se rather than Si, making them less concerned with preserving past precedent than ISTJs are. Finally, ISTPs are more inclined toward “hands-on” and Realistic careers, whereas ISTJs gravitate toward “white collar” sorts of work.

ISTP Personality Development & “Functional Stack”

Each personality type prefers to use four of the eight functions first described by Jung. These four functions comprise a type’s “functional stack.” The relative strength of preference for these four functions is expressed in the following manner: dominant, auxiliary, tertiary, and inferior. ISTPs’ first preference is Ti, followed by Se, Ni and Fe respectively. This is depicted in the arrangement of their functional stack:

ISTP Functional Stack

Dominant function: Introverted Thinking (Ti)
Auxiliary function: Extraverted Sensing (Se)
Tertiary function: Introverted Intuition (Ni)
Inferior function: Extraverted Feeling (Fe)

While we will soon discuss each function in greater depth, for now, we will turn to another feature of ISTPs’ personality—their type development. As is true for all types, ISTPs’ type development consists of three general phases. These phases roughly correspond to the ordering of the functional stack, with Ti being the first function to blossom, Se the second, on so on. But as we will see, the inferior function is sort of a special case, summoning ISTPs’ attention at an earlier phase than might otherwise be expected.

Phase I (Childhood-20s)

This phase is characterized by the emergence and differentiation of ISTPs’ dominant function, Introverted Thinking (Ti). Early in life, ISTPs often use their Ti to focus on one or two pursuits. They may for instance, funnel their Ti energies into mastering video games, tinkering with computers, or learning the best way of shooting a basketball. Since they often apply their Ti to hands-on activities—sports, Legos, drumming, video games, and the like—Phase I ISTPs may also show significant development of their auxiliary function, Extraverted Sensing (Se).

Since their Ti is a rational Judging function, ISTPs tend to approach life fairly seriously. Even from a relatively young age, they can be self-disciplined and goal-oriented, striving for excellence in whatever they do. They can differ markedly from ESTPs in this regard, whose dominant function (Se) is a Perceiving function, leading Phase I ESTPs to be more open-ended and easygoing. While both types utilize Se and Ti, ESTPs are more concerned with perceiving or experiencing the outside world (Se), while ISTPs are more intentional, focused, and self-directed (Ti).

Phase II (Late Teens-30s)

Once their dominant Ti reaches a certain threshold of strength and dominance, ISTPs’ inferior function, Extraverted Feeling (Fe), enters the picture and begins to play a more influential role. This can be confusing because Fe is not next in line in their functional stack. Its undue influence can be understood as deriving from its bipolar relationship with ISTPs’ dominant Ti.

Phase II ISTPs also show increasing use and development of their auxiliary function, Extraverted Sensing (Se). This may involve exploring new hobbies and interests, such as gourmet cooking. As a Perceiving function, Se also leads to an opening of their Ti judgments to see if they pass the test of lived experience. Since Se is an extraverted and expansive function, Phase II ISTPs may feel it necessary to explore a wide range of experiences before arriving at confident conclusions.

Phase II ISTPs may also begin to tap into their tertiary function, Introverted Intuition (Ni), which can subconsciously assist ISTPs in piecing together their Se experiences, further clarifying their identity and worldview.

Phase III (30s, 40s, & Beyond)

If all goes well and they are fortunate enough to enter Phase III, ISTPs become increasingly aware of the insidious ways of their inferior Fe. As they become more aware of their inferior and learn to function more authentically as ISTPs, they can experience greater balance between their Ti and Fe. This will be elaborated later in this profile.

ISTPs’ Dominant Function: Introverted Thinking (Ti)

To understand ISTPs, or other IP types, it is necessary to recognize the full implications of their dominant function being a Judging function. I discuss this issue in my post,Rethinking Judging and Perceiving in Introverts. In short, I suggest that ISTPs are best viewed as predominant Judgers and display many characteristics of EJs, only that these behaviors are directed inwardly or toward themselves.

Ti involves the use of logic and reason for the sake of understanding a given problem, situation, or system. ISTPs use Ti to solve problems, to optimize functioning, and to bring structure and order to their inner world. This inner structuring grants them a strong sense of inner control. It allows ISTPs to be inwardly self-disciplined and to independently manage their lives and personal projects.

The disciplined nature of Ti may inspire ISTPs to frame their lives in terms of personal challenges or a series of independent projects. While not shying away from competing with others, ISTPs enjoy taking on challenges and projects for the mere pleasure of it. Such challenges may be physical (e.g., trying to achieve an optimal level of fitness), practical (e.g., fixing a car), creative (e.g., craftsmanship), or interpersonal.

At times, the inwardly focused and intentional nature of Ti lead can lead ISTPs to mistype themselves as ISTJs. In so doing, they rightly recognize their inner Judging nature, but wrongly conclude that they must be a J-type. They fail to recognize that the J-P label refers only to outward demeanor and behavior. This may partly explain what I see as the underrepresentation of ISTPs in demographic data.

Ti might also be viewed in terms of fluid intelligence, whereas Extraverted Thinking (Te) seems more related to crystallized intelligence. Ti is more intuitive, contextual, and right-brained, whereas Te is more procedure-oriented and left-brained. The fluid nature of their Ti, combined with the keen observational powers of their Se, contributes to ISTPs’ acumen as practical problem solvers. ISTPs can analyze a situation, discern how things should work, and then determine how to fix it. While a Te type might feel compelled to use schematics or manuals to diagnose the problem, ISTPs rely on their Ti’s ability to reason their way through concrete problems, even those they’ve never encountered. This contributes to their skill as mechanics, maintenance workers, machinists, surgeons, technicians, etc.

ISTPs’ Auxiliary Function: Extraverted Sensing (Se)

Introverted Sensing (Si) is conservative with respect to new sensations and the material world. Extraverted Sensing (Se), by contrast, is more materially liberal and novelty-oriented. Se types (especially ESPs) often exhibit a laissez-faire, “eat, drink, and be merry” approach to life.

Unlike Si, Se is not content with routine and familiar experiences. For this reason, ISTPs enjoy physical thrills and new sensations. Their Ti penchant for challenges, combined with the physically active and explorative nature of their Se, makes ISTPs solid candidates for sports and physical challenges. While their inferior Fe may like the camaraderie associated with team sports, ISTPs may also enjoy the individual challenge of activities like cycling or long-distance running.

Se also attunes to the concrete details and sensory information of the environment by way of the five senses. SP types scan the environment for interesting sensory novelties, noticing details in the environment that other types might readily gloss over. This is why SPs (especially ESPs) often have strong visual recall, or what is sometimes dubbed a “photographic” memory. ISTPs may utilize their Se’s attention to detail in any number of ways.

One of my ISTP friends, for instance, enjoys scavenging fields for arrowheads. As he saunters about, his Se scans the environment in hopes of finding another lost treasure. After locating an arrowhead, he further enlists his Se to explore its shape, texture, and other features.

ISTPs also employ their Se in their daily work as mechanics, technicians, chefs, construction workers, etc. They make excellent craftsmen, using their Se to attend to the finest physical details. They love working with their hands and using tools to produce high quality pieces.

Unlike the Ne-Si function pair, which encourages makeshift tool use (Ne) in the name of material conservation (Si), the Se-Ni function pair impels ISTPs to acquire the right tools in order to do the job the “right way.” In this vein, ISTPs are not opposed to spending a little extra on high quality tools, parts, etc.

Se also differs from Ne in that it is not a highly verbal or abstract function. So while INTPs enjoy sitting around discussing ideas, ISTPs would often prefer to be “doing” something. Even watching sports can be more stimulating than conversation for ISTPs, since it stimulates their Se and allows them to vicariously participate in the action.

ISTPs’ Tertiary Function: Introverted Intuition (Ni)

ISTPs’ tertiary function is Introverted Intuition (Ni). In combination with their dominant Ti, ISTPs may display some degree of interest in abstract or theoretical topics. After all, Ni and Ti are the same two introverted functions employed by INFJs, who are among the most theoretical-minded of all types. However, because ISTPs’ Ni is more unconscious, it is less accessible to them for immediate intuitive perception. Therefore, like other SP types, ISTPs are more likely to gain insight through analyzing a breadth of life experiences (Ti-Se). Ni can also aid in the process, helping ISTPs synthesize and extract meaning from a breadth of Se experiences.

ISTPs’ Inferior Function: Extraverted Feeling (Fe)

For those unfamiliar with the workings and powerful influence of the inferior function, as well as strategies for dealing with it, I encourage you to explore some of my posts on the inferior function. Like other types, ISTPs can be easily blinded to the degree to which their inferior function impacts their decisions and behavior.

Without sufficiently understanding the inferior function, Extraverted Feeling (Fe), ISTPs will continue to feel incomplete and be prone to unhealthy decision-making in their careers, lifestyle, and relationships.

The ISTP’s personality type dynamics can be largely understood as an attempt find a balance between Ti and Fe, independence (Ti) and interdependence (Fe), self (Ti) and others (Fe). Since Ti and Fe comprise a functional whole, ISTPs intuitively realize that they need to better integrate their Fe in order to feel more whole and complete.

Obsessiveness / Workaholism

“In the grip” of the inferior function, all personality types are prone to acting compulsively and obsessively. Grip experiences can be difficult to escape, since the less conscious self (i.e., the inferior function) takes over as the driver of the personality. While the content of grip experiences may differ across the types, their basic shape is essentially the same.

For ISTPs (and INTPs), being in the grip often involves workaholism. As T dominants, work (including personal projects and hobbies), comprises a central component of ISTPs’ identity. In doing what they enjoy, ISTPs are naturally very disciplined and thorough. When they are in the grip, however, they become obsessive, perfectionistic, and unable to let go of whatever they are doing. During such times, ISTPs may alienate themselves from others, insisting they need more and more time to themselves (this is why ISTPs often test as Enneagram Fives). They become trapped, functioning only in Judging mode (Ti-Fe), while forgoing the Perceiving functions (Se-Ni) in the middle of their functional stack.

As for all types, the process of slipping into grip experiences is often subtle and insidious. For instance, ISTPs may have a goal in mind for what they want to accomplish that day, only to discover the task much larger than they originally imagined. But because a bigger task poses a greater challenge, they take the bait and see if they can still manage to get it done. The problem, of course, is that this essentially locks them into Judging mode, since any deviation into Se Perceiving will preclude them from accomplishing their goal. This includes closing themselves off to other people, who come to be viewed as intrusions or impediments to their productivity. Consequently, ISTPs who are frequently in the grip may end up ostracizing themselves from other people.

What is interesting is that ISTPs, like other types, can be relatively unaware of falling into a grip experience, rationalizing their obsessiveness as being “efficient” or “productive.” Moreover, since grip experiences are fueled by adrenaline, they can feel “good” at some level, allowing for heightened focus and endurance. At the same time, there is a part of ISTPs that knows they are in trouble. When all they can do is compulsively hurl themselves into their work, a part of them realizes this is unsustainable, unbalanced, and potentially destructive.

To compensate for the isolation involved with grip behavior, ISTPs may “crutch” their inferior Fe through their relationships, which provides the reassurance that external Fe support is available should they need it. This is why so many ISTPs (and INTPs) struggle when it comes to balancing their work and interpersonal relationships.

Slippery & Elusive Emotions

For ISTPs and INTPs alike, their Fe is rather naive and childlike. They may be easily moved by cheesy romantic comedies or sappy love songs, anything that incites their subconscious Fe emotions. They can also be easy targets for “love at first sight” sorts of infatuation. They may be particularly susceptible to being wooed by Feeling types (especially FJs), who can bypass their typical channels of logic and appeal directly to ISTPs’ less conscious Fe.

Because of the inferior position of their Fe, ISTPs struggle to intentionally contact or understand their emotions. It’s not they never experience emotions, but only that their emotions seem to have a mind of their own, coming and going as they please. So even if ISTPs are aware of what emotions are appropriate for a given situation, they often do not “feel” them at the time, engendering a sense of awkwardness or discomfort in emotional situations. They may even experience the desired emotion a few hours later, but it’s almost as though their emotions get “stage fright” when “put on the spot.” To compensate, ISTPs may try to use their Fe to offer the socially-appropriate words. But without experiencing the emotions directly, they often sound clumsy or contrived in their expressions. At times, this can be difficult for their romantic partners, particularly for FJ types, who desire a reciprocation of authentic emotional expression. But because of their Fe stage fright, ISTPs may not experience their feelings “at the right times” or can have trouble expressing them when they are present.

While ISTPs can certainly have trouble contacting their emotions, they usually have little difficulty overriding or detaching from them. Consequently, ISTPs are less apt to struggle with guilt, regret, or shame in the way that other types might. Others may even be surprised how quickly ISTPs can resume “business as usual” after what most would consider tragic or traumatic circumstances. This should not necessarily be viewed as a flaw in the ISTP, however, but merely a reflection of the unconscious nature of their Fe.

Conflict-Avoidance & Desire for Affirmation

ISTPs’ want everyone to feel included and to be treated with fairness and respect (Fe). While not as warm or effusive as FJ types, ISTPs are concerned with others’ feelings and try to avoid hurting or offending them. Like FJ types, they seek to maintain a basic level of harmony in their immediate circumstances.

Fe also contributes to ISTPs’ desire for public affirmation. Fe involves making connections between one’s own emotions and those of others. While ISTPs may not always “feel” what others are feeling, their Fe still desires the sense of social affirmation and validation. Consequently, there are times when ISTPs are helpful or compliant largely for the sake of external approval or to maintain a certain public perception. ISTPs with a strong concern for their image can take social engagements quite seriously. They want others to see them as laudable employees, spouses, parents, or citizens. Their desire for public esteem can also be a motivating force in ISTPs’ desire for achievement (This is why ISTPs may also score high as Enneagram Threes).

ISTPs’ propensity for conflict-avoidance and need for affirmation, on the one hand, with their need for independence (Ti), on the other, contributes to no small number of relational difficulties. Especially when in the grip of workaholism, ISTPs may feel they don’t need or want other people around. Eventually, they come to a point of feeling miserably imbalanced, which prompts them to reinitiate contact with others, at least until they fall into the grip again. This cycle of alternating between needing and devaluing others is common among ISTPs and narcissists alike.

In the name of conflict-avoidance and preservation of external harmony, ISTPs may do all they can to circumvent directly expressing their frustrations or grievances. Wittingly or not, they view conflict as a potential threat to the relationship they depend on to meet their Fe needs, as well as a threat to the flawless image they seek to preserve. So rather than giving voice (Fe) to their concerns, ISTPs are more apt to analyze (Ti) or act on them (Se), often in passive-aggressive ways. They may, for instance, intentionally start spending more time at the office as a passive form of rebellion against their partner. Or, they may make sudden executive decisions without giving others any say or prior notice. Poor communication can also lead ISTPs to create a convoluted set of assumptions about what their partners think, want, and expect. Unhealthy ISTPs may spin an ever-expanding web of faulty beliefs and assumptions about their partner. In so doing, they often come to resent or otherwise think negatively of their mates, even if largely a product of their own faulty conclusions.

Personal Growth for ISTPs

Personal growth for ISTPs involves integrating their Fe through consistent and satisfying use of their Ti and Se. Integrating ISTPs must also must learn to recognize the difference between healthy modes of work versus functioning in the grip of their inferior function. Healthy work for ISTPs includes remaining open to Se experiences and diversions, which can keep them from becoming too one-track minded.

In addition to taking a healthier approach to their work, integrating ISTPs must enhance their self-awareness and communication in their relationships. This includes working to unearth all their implicit assumptions about relationships in general and their partner in particular. It means being willing to dialogue about uncomfortable topics that may produce temporary pain or conflict. It is not until they “clear the air,” learning to be more open and honest with themselves and their partners, that ISTPs will experience true satisfaction and wholeness in their relationships.
